[Page 1]
Guide on effective risk data
aggregation and risk reporting
May 2024
1 Introduction
The ability of institutions to effectively manage and aggregate risk-related data is an
essential precondition for sound decision-making and strong risk governance. This
applies to any data used to steer and manage institutions, both strategically and
operationally, as well as data used for risk, financial and supervisory reporting.
Various industry studies1 have identified the economic benefits of more accurate
data, including advancements in digitalisation, improved risk management and more
effective strategic steering, which contributes to higher revenues and profitability. In
the longer term, more accurate data can also help to lower operational and
information technology (IT) costs through enhanced automation and the
modernisation of IT architectures. In the context of risk management specifically, a
major benefit of high data quality is an enhanced ability to avoid material losses due
to, for example, an inability to accurately quantify group-wide exposures to specific
groups of clients in a stress or crisis situation, a miscalculation of key risk
management or regulatory indicators, or the inefficient monitoring of adherence to
risk limits. From a prudential perspective, high data quality is critical for effective risk
management processes, particularly for managing group-wide risk concentrations,
whether credit, market or third-party related. It is also essential for compliance with
supervisory regulations and assessments, which rely on timely, complete and
accurate information being provided by supervised institutions. Unfortunately, losses
caused by poor data quality are rarely captured in a systematic manner, often
leaving the potential negative effects unquantified or underestimated as a result.
Improving data quality requires a large investment and is a task made more difficult
by the complexity of managing the execution risks of large-scale remediation
projects.
The crucial nature of risk data aggregation was initially observed during the 2008
financial crisis2 and, more recently, has been highlighted in the various data
collection activities launched by ECB Banking Supervision during the global
pandemic and other stress situations. Difficulties in terms of data accuracy, integrity,
completeness, timeliness and adaptability are still widely encountered, suggesting
that institutions are still focusing on the cost and implementation challenges of
improving risk data aggregation and reporting, rather than the benefits of remediating
long-standing deficiencies in this area.
1 See, for example, “Living with BCBS 239”, McKinsey & Company, May 2017 and “BCBS 239
Compliance: A catalyst for gaining competitive advantage”, Deloitte, 2017.
2 “Risk Management Lessons from the Global Banking Crisis of 2008”, Senior Supervisors Group,
October 2009.

[Page 2]
2
Against this background, ECB Banking Supervision is intensifying its supervisory
approach. Since its inception, ECB Banking Supervision has regarded governance
and quality of risk data as a supervisory priority.3 In 2016, the ECB launched a
thematic review on effective risk data aggregation and risk reporting (RDARR).4 The
thematic review assessed credit institutions’ overarching governance, data
aggregation capabilities and reporting practices, based on a sample of 25 significant
institutions. This assessment was guided by the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision’s principles for effective risk data aggregation and risk reporting (Basel
Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) 239 principles).5 It was also
complemented by extensive benchmarking and two additional analyses: a “data
lineage” exercise for credit risk and a “fire drill” exercise for liquidity risk. Overall, the
results of the thematic review and the findings from on-site inspections (OSIs)
revealed shortcomings in the effectiveness of data governance frameworks (as this
applies to RDARR)6. It was determined that none of the significant institutions in the
sample of the thematic review, including those classified as global systemically
important institutions, had fully followed the BCBS 239 principles. As such, serious
weaknesses in terms of their RDARR practices were identified7. The identified issues
were followed up during dedicated OSIs, as part of the Supervisory Review and
Evaluation Process (SREP) and on-going supervision. However, the observed
progress stalled on some of the key deficiencies, such as the effectiveness of
governance arrangements, risk data architectures and supporting IT infrastructures.
In 2019, the ECB therefore addressed a letter to all significant institutions8 under
direct supervision within the Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM), urging them to
make substantial and timely improvements and to implement the integrated reporting
solutions considered to be best practice.
Despite this increased supervisory scrutiny, the ECB has concluded that the
progress made by significant institutions to date has been generally insufficient.
Despite its importance, RDARR has not been given an appropriate level of focus,
has not been properly steered and many structural deficiencies relating to it have not
yet been tackled. As a result, adequate RDARR capabilities are still the exception
and full adherence to the BCBS 239 principles has yet to be achieved.9
3 “ECB Banking Supervision: SSM priorities 2016”, ECB, January 2016.
4 See “ECB Banking Supervision: Report on the Thematic Review on effective risk data aggregation and
risk reporting”, ECB, May 2018.
5 “Principles for effective risk data aggregation and risk reporting”, Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision, January 2013.
6 This Guide always refers to the data governance framework as it applies to RDARR within the scope
defined by the institution (see Chapter 3.2). At the institution’s discretion, the framework can apply to a
broader set of data that is beyond the scope of this Guide.
7 Large-scale miscalculations of key risk ratios and limits were observed, caused by reconciliation errors,
extensive manual adjustments, inconsistent or incomplete underlying data, and weak data quality
controls. In many cases, production times of 40 or more working days were observed for monthly risk
reports.
8 See “Supervisory expectations on risk data aggregation capabilities and risk reporting practices: the
letter of the Chair of the SSM Supervisory Board to all significant institutions”, ECB, June 2019.
9 RDARR was the worst-rated sub-category of internal governance in the 2023 SREP cycle and the ECB
has observed an increasing number of outstanding supervisory measures in this area, most of them
triggered by OSIs. Similarly, data quality management remains the least mature IT risk control domain
within the annual SREP IT Risk Questionnaire. Deficiencies at several institutions were identified during
more targeted OSIs. Likewise, recent crisis situations demonstrated the criticality of robust RDARR to
enable the decision-making bodies to react in a timely manner during similar situations.

[Page 3]
3
ECB Banking Supervision has identified deficiencies in RDARR as a key vulnerability
in its planning of supervisory priorities10 and has developed a comprehensive,
targeted supervisory strategy for the coming years. This strategy aims to ensure that
supervised institutions finally deliver substantial progress in remedying their
identified structural shortcomings.
The purpose of this Guide is to describe the practices which, in the ECB's view, are
necessary from the perspective of RDARR to ensure effective processes are in place
to identify, manage, monitor and report the risks supervised institutions are or might
be exposed to. This is also required by the currently applicable law (hereafter
referred to as “minimum supervisory expectations”). The information in this Guide is
based on evidence collected through the supervisory activities described above and,
as such, prioritises discussion of project management and the role of the
management body, as these were identified as root causes of the insufficient
progress made on RDARR. This Guide focuses on the main deficiencies that have
been identified by supervisors and is intended to assist institutions in strengthening
their RDARR capabilities, while also sharing practices that have been identified in
the industry. Thereby it summarises and re-states also previous communications on
RDARR. Furthermore, the level of ambition that ECB Banking Supervision expects
from institutions regarding their implementation programmes is re-stated, with a
focus on tangible results. This Guide should also enable a more targeted focus of
supervisory activities on the preconditions deemed essential for facilitating further
progress in institutions’ governance and risk data aggregation capabilities.
The Guide comprises the minimum supervisory expectations compiled by the ECB in
conjunction with the national competent authorities. It explains in detail how the ECB
applies the relevant national laws, transposing the Capital Requirements Directive
(CRD)11 in line with relevant European Banking Authority (EBA) guidelines (see
Annex 1). The ECB intends to follow up on these expectations in its supervisory
activities on a case-by-case basis, in line with the principle of proportionality.
Progress in the areas discussed in this Guide is a precondition, but not necessarily
sufficient, for achieving sound RDARR. This Guide does not impose new
requirements and the issues it addresses are not meant to be exhaustive or to limit
any supervisory follow-up activity on RDARR capabilities. The ECB expects
institutions to consider this Guide in conjunction with the BCBS 239 principles. In
addition to the applicable EU law, national law and the information provided in this
Guide, institutions are recommended to take other relevant publications from
international fora into account, such as those published by the Basel Committee on
Banking Supervision. Furthermore, institutions should also take into account all
recommendations and comply with all obligations addressed to them by the ECB in
relation to RDARR and resulting from the SREP and other supervisory activities (in
the areas, for example of internal governance, risk management and data quality
10 See “ECB Banking Supervision: SSM supervisory priorities 2023-2025”, ECB, December 2022, and
“ECB Banking Supervision: SSM supervisory priorities 2024-2026”, ECB, December 2023.
11 Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the
activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms,
amending Directive 2002/87/EC and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176,
27.6.2013, p. 338).

[Page 4]
4
controls). The ECB expects institutions to assess whether their data governance
framework complies with the applicable legal framework, aligning with the contents
of this Guide and taking any action that may be necessary.
2 References
The CRD defines a set of requirements applicable to RDARR that need to be
transposed into national law (see Annex 1). It requires institutions to have robust
governance arrangements for identifying, managing, monitoring and reporting the
risks they are facing, as well as adequate internal control mechanisms that are
consistent with effective risk management. The management body of an institution is
responsible for approving and periodically reviewing the strategies and policies for
managing and monitoring risk. Members of the management body are required to
possess sufficient knowledge, skills and experience, both individually and
collectively, to be able to meet their responsibilities and understand the institution’s
activities, including its main risks. An overview of national transpositions related to
RDARR is provided in Annex 2.
The EBA provides further interpretations of legal provisions on the assessment of
institutions’ information and communication technology (ICT) for risk data
aggregation capabilities, as well as specifications on the integrity of data, ICT
projects and change management.12 Furthermore, EBA Guidelines on internal
governance specify that regular and transparent reporting mechanisms should be
established at banks to provide the management bodies with timely, accurate,
concise and meaningful risk reports.
The joint European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) and EBA Guidelines on
the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body
(EBA/GL/2021/06) require the individual members of the management body of an
institution to have an up-to-date understanding of the institution’s business, activities
and its risks. The same is required for the management body as a collective. The
ECB Guide to fit and proper assessments13 specifies the ECB’s main expectations
and policies on conducting suitability assessments of the members of an institution’s
management body. Furthermore, the ECB Guide on climate-related and
environmental risks14 includes the expectation, among others, that the management
body will consider climate-related and environmental risks when developing the
institution’s overall business strategy.
For institutions using internal models to determine regulatory capital requirements,
there are binding requirements on the quality of the main data, particularly for default
and historical loss information used both for model development and the
quantification of risk parameters, as well for data documentation, reporting and the
supporting IT infrastructure.
12 See Annex 1 for more details.
13 “Guide to fit and proper assessments”, ECB, December 2021.
14 “Guide on climate-related and environmental risks”, ECB, November 2020.

[Page 5]
5
The ECB uses the BCBS 239 principles as a benchmark of best practices when
assessing institutions’ RDARR capabilities. The ECB applies the principle of
proportionality in its assessment, in line with national law implementing Article 74(2)
CRD. The ECB’s Report on the Thematic Review on effective risk data aggregation
and risk reporting identifies a set of best practices and areas of concern related to
the BCBS 239 principles.
3 Supervisory expectations
The ECB strongly recommends that significant institutions make substantial progress
in improving their data aggregation capabilities and internal risk reporting practices
and has identified seven key areas of concern. These seven areas, detailed in
Sections 3.1 to 3.7 below, are considered important prerequisites for robust
governance arrangements and effective processes for identifying, monitoring and
reporting risks. They are intended to be addressed within a reasonably short time
frame, if not properly addressed already.
3.1 Responsibilities of the management body
In accordance with Article 88(1) CRD and its respective national transpositions, as
interpreted by Title II of the EBA Guidelines on internal governance
(EBA/GL/2021/05), the management body must oversee the implementation of the
institution’s strategic objectives, risk strategy and internal governance. The
management body comprises a supervisory function and a management function
that may be performed by either a single body or two separate bodies. Which key
elements of RDARR are under the responsibility of which function within the
management body depends on the structure adopted by institutions, on the
applicable governance structures foreseen in national company law and regulations,
and on the internal governance arrangements of the institution.15 This Guide does
not advocate any particular governance structure and is intended to embrace all
existing structures.
The management body’s responsibilities, role and the institution’s risk culture are
paramount in ensuring effective processes are in place for identifying, managing,
monitoring and reporting risks, as well as adequate and robust internal control
mechanisms. Lacking or insufficient knowledge, training and experience in RDARR
topics and IT or lacking or insufficient awareness of the underlying risks means that
improvements may be only partially or ineffectively implemented. To ensure
appropriate risk data aggregation capabilities and internal risk reporting practices,
the management body of each significant institution is responsible for the following.
1. Accepting accountability and exercising full responsibility for risk data quality
and governance as a part of the overall risk management framework.
15 The applicable law may consist of national regulations which may need to be interpreted in line with
relevant Union law and EBA guidelines; see recitals 55-56 and Article 3(1), points 7-9 of CRD.

[Page 6]
6
2. Making RDARR a key priority for the institution and ensuring that adequate and
sufficient material, financial and human resources are dedicated to it. In
addition, the management body should approve and implement the institution’s
data governance framework. This includes setting (i) detailed requirements for
data quality in terms of accuracy, integrity, completeness and timeliness in
normal and in stress periods, and (ii) detailed key performance indicators for
monitoring data quality.
3. Overseeing, prioritising and monitoring key deliverables within the agreed
timelines of the remediation programmes (see Section 3.7) and the standard
business processes, as well as regularly assessing RDARR capabilities in
relation to the best practices described in the BCBS 239 principles. Additionally,
the management body should establish the institution's view of what it means to
adhere to the BCBS 239 principles, while also considering any potential
limitations that might prevent full risk data aggregation in technical or legal
terms.
4. Selecting one or two members of the management body in its management
function to exercise responsibility for implementing the data governance
framework.16 This does not, however, in any way discharge the management
body from its overall accountability and responsibility for the data governance
framework of the institution. In cases where only one or two persons constitute
the management function of the management body, also considering paragraph
25 of the background and rationale of EBA/GL/2021/05, one or two senior
manager(s) with a direct reporting line and access to the management body
should be appointed as having responsibility for ensuring implementation of the
data governance framework in the institution.
5. Setting clear roles and responsibilities for RDARR within the business
organisation (including relevant committees), as well as particular roles and
responsibilities described in Section 3.3.
6. Ensuring the implementation of policies and processes for RDARR at the group
level. The management bodies of the subsidiaries are responsible for
implementing these group-wide policies and processes.
7. Regularly confirming that the internal risk reports are meaningful and well
balanced in terms of qualitative and quantitative information and contribute to
sound decision making.
8. Regularly monitoring the defined data quality key performance indicators and
corresponding action plans to solve significant deviations identified. This
16 It has been observed that the selection of one or two specific member(s) of the management body in its
management function for RDARR facilitates the implementation of the framework and ensures that
sufficient attention is devoted to data governance at the management body level. Appointing the CRO
or the CRO together with the CFO – as responsible persons is seen as a pragmatic solution (if at the
management body level). Where the management body delegates the executive function to a single
person, selecting a senior manager as the head of the risk management function to exercise
responsibility for implementing the data governance framework is seen as adequate.

[Page 7]
7
includes responsibility for the implementation of robust data quality processes
and controls.
9. Ensuring that members of the management body and heads of internal control
functions, including the heads of risk management, compliance and internal
audit, have a sufficient understanding of data management, IT and financial and
non-financial risks (including, among others, climate risk and IT and security
risks), as well as the related data and reporting requirements. If required for
their position or institution, the management body should ensure its members
have sufficient skills and experience in those same areas. This enables
individual members to assess the effect of these matters on the institution’s
business and to address the challenges posed by the digitalisation of the
banking sector and climate-related risks.
10. Ensuring that the knowledge, skills and experience of its members relating to
data management, IT and financial and non-financial risks, as well as the
related data and reporting requirements, are considered when assessing the
collective suitability of its members. This should also be reviewed on an
ongoing basis.
11. Subject to role-specific considerations, undertaking regular training to ensure
that individual members of the management body possess sufficient and up-to-
date knowledge and skills that allow them to understand and assess the
business and main risks of the institution, including data management, IT,
financial and non-financial risks, as well as the related data and reporting
requirements, and their impact on the operations of the institution.
3.2 Sufficient scope of application
In line with the provisions of the national transposition of Articles 74 and 76 CRD,
institutions should establish a data governance framework that allows the supervised
institution to identify, manage, monitor and report risks. To ensure the completeness
of processes and control mechanisms, the framework should be applicable to all
material legal entities, risks and business lines as well as financial and supervisory
reporting processes, and should cover the entire lifecycle of the data (i.e. all
processes from data origination, capture and aggregation to reporting). In this
regard, the ECB recommends that institutions fully integrate the data governance
framework into the existing governance arrangements. Institutions should ensure
that existing processes and control mechanisms are adequate and sufficient to
manage data quality throughout the group (e.g. for financial and supervisory
reporting processes).
The data governance framework of an institution should clearly define and document
the scope of application and should specify the reports, models and risk indicators
that are included, considering the nature, scale and complexity of the institution’s
operations and its risk profile.

[Page 8]
8
Clear, proportionate and measurable criteria should be defined for material legal
entities and included in the scope of application. Furthermore, this scope should
include all material risks and risk concentrations from the institution’s risk
identification process.17
1. In terms of reports, the ECB recommends that the scope of the data
governance framework should comprise, at a minimum, the following.
(a) Internal risk reports used in decision-making and steering processes. This
includes reports that provide information on risk appetite indicators
(metrics and limits) as well as the main overall risk reports and main risk
reports per material risk type (financial and non-financial).
(b) Financial reports that are externally published as well as annual financial
statements.
(c) Supervisory reports that are submitted to financial supervisory or
regulatory authorities. This includes FINREP/COREP reporting templates
including the Short Term Exercise, submissions to EU-wide EBA stress
tests and SREP stress tests18 and Pillar 3 disclosures.
2. In terms of models, the scope should include key internal risk management
models including, but not limited to, Pillar 1 regulatory capital models (such as
internal ratings-based (IRB) approaches for credit risk), Pillar 2 risk and capital
models and other key risk management models (such as IFRS9 collective
provisions models and value-at-risk models). This includes input data for model
development as well as resulting model outputs (e.g. exposure at default,
probability of default or loss-give-default estimates) that are crucial for
managing the risks faced by the institution.
3. In terms of key risk indicators, the scope should include at least the institution’s
risk appetite indicators as well as other key risk indicators referred to in the
internal risk, financial and supervisory reports and models described above.
The set of key risk indicators depends on the risk profile of the institution and
should be defined by the institution itself. In this regard, the critical data
elements underlying the key risk indicators should also be explicitly identified.19
3.3 Effective data governance framework
A clear allocation of roles and responsibilities in the area of data quality, as well as
ownership of data quality for business, internal control and IT functions, is required to
establish and maintain effective governance processes and control mechanisms
17 See the ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP), ECB, November
2018. See also the ECB Guide on climate-related and environmental risks and the BCBS Principles for
the effective management and supervision of climate-related financial risks.
18 Taking place every 2 years. See the ECB’s banking supervision website for more information on EU-
wide EBA stress tests and SREP stress tests.
19 In this context, critical data elements are those data elements that are used to calculate the key risk
indicators and have a direct or significant impact on the value of the indicator or technical routine of the
calculation and the reporting.

[Page 9]
9
within the overall internal control framework.20 To ensure the effectiveness of a
group-wide data governance framework, significant institutions should set out clear
requirements for data quality within the scope of application. The frameworks should
be formalised in internal policies covering the underlying processes, including the
roles and responsibilities of the different functions involved as well as any related
decision-making process, and subject to approval at an appropriate level and regular
review.
The following list details the minimum elements which in the ECB’s view institutions
should have in place to achieve an effective data governance framework, both at the
group level and at the level of material legal entities.
1. Data owners responsible for key risk indicators and critical data elements
throughout the complete aggregation process (front to end). Delegation of this
responsibility is generally considered to be adequate and includes:
• contributing, in alignment with data users (or consumers), to the definition
of data quality controls and the classification of key risk indicators and
underlying critical data elements;
• ensuring the accuracy, integrity, completeness and timeliness of data;
• ensuring the monitoring and reporting of data quality through data quality
processes;
• ensuring the remediation of insufficient data quality;
• managing metadata relating to the data lineage and data dictionary (see
Section 3.4).
2. A central data governance function that is responsible for (i) issuing policies and
processes for data quality management, (ii) overseeing proper implementation
of the data governance framework across the organisation, (iii) ensuring the
evaluation and monitoring of data quality, and (iv) participating in change
management processes with a material impact on RDARR, such as those
triggered through mergers or acquisitions of material legal entities, the
outsourcing of functions to third parties, the launch of new products, the launch
of new tools, upgrades of existing tools and other IT change initiatives.
3. A validation function within the second line of defence that is independent from
the units involved in data governance, RDARR processes and ensures that the
institution’s RDARR processes are functioning as intended. In cases where the
validation function is part of the same function that is responsible for data
governance or RDARR (e.g. the risk management function), adequate
segregation of duties and other mitigating measures should be implemented in
order to avoid or mitigate conflicts of interest.21 This validation function should
perform regular assessments of the institution’s RDARR capabilities for all
20 The general requirements for an internal control framework and the respective responsibilities of the
internal control functions remain (Title V, EBA Guideline on internal governance (EBA/GL/2021/05)).
21 See paragraph 107 of EBA/GL/2021/05.

[Page 10]
10
material entities and risk types and should cover all components of the RDARR
processes (e.g. IT infrastructure, data lineage and data taxonomy), including
the oversight of outsourced functions, IT change initiatives, mergers and
acquisitions and new product launches. It should also be equipped with
adequate and sufficient human resources and the relevant IT, data and
reporting expertise. Appropriate organisational arrangements should be in place
to ensure the effective independence of this validation function. The decision as
to which specific organisational arrangements to adopt should take the nature,
size and scale of the institution into consideration, as well as the complexity of
the risks inherent in its business model.
4. An internal audit function that serves as the third line of defence and
periodically provides independent reviews of the validation function, data
governance framework, RDARR capabilities and processes and the quality of
data used for the quantification of risks. These independent reviews may be
complemented by supervisory reviews or, whenever deemed necessary by the
institution, by an external independent review.
3.4 Integrated data architecture
To ensure the quality of the data used for risk, supervisory and financial reporting, an
integrated data architecture22 should be implemented and documented at the group
level. This should include data taxonomies – specifically a dictionary of the main
business definitions and a metadata repository – that cover material legal entities,
business lines, material risks and related reports, key risk indicators and their critical
data elements, as well as models that are within the scope of application. There
could be specific data taxonomies per risk type or legal entity, as long as these are
consistent and cover the scope of application (see Section 3.2). The management of
data taxonomies should entail:
1. uniform data definitions and glossaries with clear ownership of data;
2. validation rules allowing specific values or a range of values;
3. complete and up-to-date data lineages23 on data attribute level24 (starting from
data capture and including extraction, transformation and loading) for the risk
22 Data architecture enables the institution to integrate all relevant data sources in line with defined data
taxonomies.
23 Data lineage is information about the movement and transformation of data from front (capture) to end
and enables a bank to (i) understand if data quality controls are sufficient and well placed in the data
flow, (ii) identify interconnections between data definitions and taxonomies, (iii) ensure that when data
fields are loaded or transformed across or within systems they are still in line with the reporting
requirements and definitions, (iv) support the identification of data points needed for specific ad hoc
reporting needs, (v) in case of data quality incidents be able to track back the source of the issue in a
timely manner and to (vi) allow traceability for (external) validation.
24 A data element contains information as an independent field while a data attribute, in general, is a
single value description (i.e. its metadata, such as a business description of the content, type, format,
etc.) for a data element (or data point or data object). As an example, data attributes are often stored
as a column in a table and are used in the technical mapping to calculate key risk indicators, whereas
data elements impact the specific indicator values.

[Page 11]
11
indicators, and their critical data elements, identified as being within the scope
of application (see point 3 of Section 3.2).
Implementation choices should be fit for purpose, well documented and focused on
providing the necessary information for steering the institution and managing its
risks.
3.5 Group-wide data quality management and standards
Group-wide policies and processes should be established within the overall risk
management framework or the data governance framework to ensure that data
quality controls are effective and complete and material data quality issues are
remediated, as well as to make any limitations transparent and account for data
quality risks within the scope of application. Such group-wide policies and processes
should ultimately include the following.
1. The implementation of data quality controls (covering, at least, the dimensions
of accuracy and integrity, completeness and timeliness) from front office
systems (and other capture systems) to the reporting layer for the key risk
indicators and critical data elements identified as being in the scope of
application, automated where appropriate. In addition, periodical reconciliation
with institutions’ sources and reports (in the areas of accounting and finance
and with external sources used) and related model development data.
2. The definition and measurement of data quality indicators covering, at least, the
dimensions of accuracy and integrity, completeness and timeliness (including
tolerance levels and robust correction processes) with documented operational
processes in case of breaches. Data quality indicators should allow for the
systematic monitoring and recording of the quality of the related data covering
the entire lifecycle of the data.25 They should also be periodically communicated
to the institution’s management body alongside an impact analysis of the given
data quality on risk measurement effectiveness and the risk profile of the
institution (see Section 3.1).
3. An up-to-date and complete overview (“register”) of data quality issues and
limitations, including (i) an assessment of the severity of these issues, (ii) a root
cause analysis, (iii) a quantitative impact analysis of material/severe data errors
on the risk and business areas affected, (iv) clearly defined processes and
responsibilities for remediating and escalating data quality issues, depending on
the materiality of the issues, (v) deadlines for remediation, and (vi) a date for
effective remediation (including appropriate evidence).
25 As an example, the ECB identified good practices related to the assessment of the quality of data used
from third-party providers in its "Good practices for climate-related and environmental risk
management”.

[Page 12]
12
4. The full integration of end-user computing or end-user developed applications,
including an overview of such applications, into data quality management
policies and processes.
5. Arrangements for any manual workarounds within the scope of application to be
documented and subjected to adequate control mechanisms (e.g. the “four-
eyes principle”, rigorous documentation and audit trailing of changes, data
overrides and sign-offs) until the data preparation and reporting steps that are
determined to have a material impact on data quality are embedded in an audit-
trailed IT-controlled environment.
6. Adequate consideration of data quality risks in the internal capital adequacy
assessment process (ICAAP) and the internal liquidity adequacy assessment
process, as existing data quality issues might lead to an underestimation of
risks and should be addressed in the risk quantification by an additional margin
of conservatism.
3.6 Timeliness of internal risk reporting
Accurate, complete and timely data are fundamental to effective risk management
and identification. To manage risks effectively, the right information needs to be
presented to the right people at the right time. There are two factors that determine
the timeliness of risk reporting: the frequency of risk reporting and the time needed to
produce the reports.
The frequency of internal risk reporting should be consistent with the dynamics of
potential changes to the risk figures: greater dynamism requires higher reporting
frequencies. For example, the ECB Guide to the ICAAP clarifies26 that “the frequency
of reporting of the ICAAP outcomes (such as how material risks, key indicators, etc.
are evolving) to the management body is expected to be at least quarterly but,
depending on the size, complexity, business model and risk types of the institution,
reporting might need to be more frequent to ensure timely management action”.
Additionally, different types of risk figures are subject to different degrees of
dynamism, with economic risk measures generally being more volatile than
normative risk measures and, thus, generally requiring higher reporting frequencies.
The time needed to produce a risk report has a similar impact on the effectiveness of
risk management: the longer it takes an institution to produce an internal risk report,
the longer the period in which the risk situation remains unclear and the higher the
likelihood of delayed reactions.
The ECB expects an institution to ensure that the combination of reporting frequency
and production time is calibrated in such a manner as to allow for timely reactions to
changes in its risk situation, thereby complying with its set of internal risk appetite
indicators (metrics and limits). For internal risk reports in normal situations, it is
generally understood that institutions will not be able to react to changes in a timely
26 In paragraph 29.

[Page 13]
13
manner if a monthly or quarterly risk report needs more than 20 working days to
produce. The production time is dependent on the materiality and volatility of the key
risk indicators to be reported.
In addition to sound reporting capabilities in normal situations, institutions should
implement effective RDARR capabilities for stress or crisis situations to adequately
manage unexpected stress events, such as the recent COVID-19 pandemic, as well
as to ensure proper adaptation to new or altered reporting and disclosure
requirements. In times of emerging stress, risk data aggregation capabilities should
be adaptable enough to meet ad hoc data requests with sufficient granularity (e.g.
customer data for managing credit risk concentrations) both at entity and at group
level. The ECB expects timely risk reporting to remain unhampered by such issues
as a fragmented IT infrastructure or a large amount of manual aggregation
processes, even in stress situations.
3.7 Effective implementation programmes
Institutions that do not yet follow the best practices that are described in the BCBS
239 principles should put implementation measures in place accordingly. An
implementation programme should cover any gaps and address any weaknesses
identified through internal or external reviews, including OSIs and off-site reviews by
ECB Banking Supervision. The programmes should be supported by adequate
project management governance, including measures and metrics to control project
execution risks, and adequate material, financial and human resources. The
implementation plans should clearly define remedial actions, targets, milestones,
roles, responsibilities and, if applicable, intermediate actions to mitigate weaknesses
that require a longer implementation time to be fully addressed. Implementation
activities should consider their potential effect on (i) internal models, (ii) interactions
and interdependencies of risk data aggregation with the integration of financial
reporting frameworks, and (iii) overall business and ICT strategies. The
implementation programmes should be ambitious yet feasible. Periodical reporting
on the progress of the programmes, including analysis of impediments, delays and
other factors, should be in place.
As specified in point 3 of Section 3.1, the management body is responsible for the
timeline and milestones of the implementation. Good project management practices
provide that one or two member(s) of the management body in the management
function to be appointed with responsibility for the execution of the programme, and
reporting to the management body in its supervisory function. The management
body requests and receives regular information on the progress made and assesses
and reacts to any delays in the implementation.

[Page 14]
14
4 Supervisory approach
This Guide is a key building block of the 2023-25 work programme. With it, the ECB
details its minimum supervisory expectations for a set of priority topics that have
been identified as necessary preconditions for effective RDARR.
The more targeted focus of supervisory activities on the areas that are critical to
delivering progress is coupled with a more intrusive use of supervisory powers to
tackle severe, long-lasting deficiencies. The work programme includes (i) additional
targeted engagement with a clear focus on selected priority areas, in particular on
the responsibility of management bodies for governance and execution oversight, (ii)
horizontal benchmarking of findings from off-site and on-site activities against
expectations expressed in the Guide, and (iii) an enhanced focus on the data quality
of institutions’ supervisory reporting.27
ECB Banking Supervision is committed to using all of its supervisory tools and
powers if supervisory measures and time frames are not met (e.g. in the context of
the SREP, related regular supervisory activities, OSIs and internal model
investigations).
Accordingly, ECB Banking Supervision is intensifying its intrusiveness in the context
of the annual SREP assessments, as well as in more targeted engagements.
Related findings and measures are being closely followed up.28 Supervisory intensity
is being upscaled in cases where past supervisory actions have not led to the
desired changes in a timely manner or where deficiencies continue to be evidenced
(e.g. in the biennial EBA/SSM stress tests). The ECB is further strengthening the use
of quantitative and qualitative measures to address gaps in institutions’ internal
control and governance frameworks, in particular for RDARR. Effective supervisory
tools that are being used include clear qualitative requirements with time-bound
milestones for remediation. If such requirements and timeframes are not met by
institutions, or material shortcomings breaching the applicable framework are
evidenced (such as inaccurate information reported on key risk indicators), the
matter is escalated further and can potentially result, for example, in the imposition of
enforcement measures, sanctions and capital add-ons. Furthermore, as the
management body is accountable for the implementation of effective and prudent
governance arrangements, deficiencies in these areas may also lead to a
reassessment of the suitability of the responsible members29 and, in severe cases,
the removal of such members.
27 This applies to the data quality of FINREP/COREP templates in particular. For this, the ECB uses data
quality indicators that represent the minimum quality standards expected from the banks in terms of
accuracy, timeliness and completeness. In addition, the ECB publishes additional data quality checks
twice per year, which are aimed at enhancing the quality of supervisory reporting data in accordance
with Article 4(1) of Decision ECB/2014/29 of 2 July 2014 as amended by Decision ECB/2017/23 of 3
August 2017. See the ECB’s banking supervision website for more information on additional
supervisory data quality checks. Furthermore, institutions are expected to always ensure consistency
between their supervisory reporting and Pillar 3 disclosures. They can count on the support of the EBA,
which has prepared and maintained a tool that specifies the mapping of the templates and tables for
disclosures with those on Implementing Technical Standards reporting. The mapping tool is accessible
to the public on the EBA’s website.
28 See “Aggregated results of SREP 2023”, ECB, December 2023.
29 See Section 5.2 of the “Guide to fit and proper assessments”, ECB, December 2021.

[Page 15]
15
In addition, RDARR capabilities are being considered as an important aspect in
many regular supervisory activities. The ECB takes these capabilities into account
when assessing consolidation transactions, for instance in the context of the
consolidation plan.30 Furthermore, in the context of fit and proper assessments, the
ECB, together with the national competent authorities, assesses the knowledge,
experience and skills of members of the management body and – where an
assessment is provided under national law – key function holders, taking institution-
specific and role-specific circumstances into consideration. In the particular context
of the ongoing digitalisation of the banking sector and the associated security
threats, the suitability assessments take into consideration the risks that institutions
may be exposed to, including data management, IT and security risks and climate-
related and environmental risks31, as well as related data and reporting
requirements, subject to a case-by-case analysis.
Within the context of supervisory reporting, ECB Banking Supervision has
consolidated and complemented the measurement of data quality by introducing its
Management Report on Data Governance and Data Quality. When completing this
report, institutions are asked to respond to a set of open questions, with at least one
member of the management body signing the answers to further foster management
body accountability.
Furthermore, the ECB continues to assess data governance and quality
management through OSIs and internal model investigations, including, but not
limited to, dedicated inspections on RDARR.32
With this Guide, the ECB intends to reinforce and clarify its minimum supervisory
expectations on a set of priority topics that are preconditions for effective RDARR.
This is to support institutions in improving their data governance framework and
governance arrangements and ensuring effective processes are in place to identify,
manage, monitor and report risks through adherence to the BCBS 239 principles and
by setting priorities for implementation projects. The ultimate objective of this is to
ensure that institutions have effective steering and risk management based on
reliable information.
30 See Section 2.2 of the “Guide on the supervisory approach to consolidation in the banking sector”,
ECB, January 2021.
31 “ECB Guide on climate-related and environmental risks”, ECB, November 2020, provides and explains
a series of standards on reporting related to climate risk.“ Walking the talk - Banks gearing up to
manage risks from climate change and environmental degradation - Results of the 2022 thematic
review on climate-related and environmental risks”, ECB, November 2022, gives an overview of the
implementation of these supervisory expectations and points out that the collection of granular data
and efforts to overcome data gaps are still in their early stages. “Good practices for climate-related and
environmental risk management”, ECB November 2022, includes a number of examples of good
practices in data governance and internal risk reporting. In addition, in 2022 the ECB performed a
climate risk stress test (“2022 climate risk stress test”, ECB, July 2022, and “ECB report on good
practices for climate stress testing”, ECB, December 2022).
32 See Section 1.2.3.3 of the “ECB Annual Report on supervisory activities 2023”, ECB, March 2024.

[Page 16]
16
Annex 1: Regulatory references
Since stating the main principles for a strong governance framework, risk data
architecture and IT infrastructure, and describing the main dimensions of institutions’
risk data aggregation capabilities and internal risk reporting practices in the BCBS
239 principles, the BCBS has followed up with several progress reports.33 These
reports issued recommendations to institutions with regard to continuing their
implementation efforts, as well as recommendations to supervisors monitoring their
progress.
CRD defines a set of requirements applicable to RDARR that need to be transposed
into national law. Article 74 CRD requires institutions to have “[…] robust governance
arrangements, which include a clear organisational structure with well-defined,
transparent and consistent lines of responsibility, effective processes to identify,
manage, monitor and report the risks they are or might be exposed to, adequate
internal control mechanisms, including sound administration and accounting
procedures, and remuneration policies and practices that are consistent with and
promote sound and effective risk management.” According to Article 76 CRD,
“Member States shall ensure that the management body approves and periodically
reviews the strategies and policies for taking up, managing, monitoring and
mitigating the risks the institution is or might be exposed to” and, according to Article
88(1)(b) CRD, “[…] the management body must ensure the integrity of the
accounting and financial reporting systems, including financial and operational
controls and compliance with the law and relevant standards”. Finally, for the
members of the management body to be able to perform their tasks and
responsibilities, they also have to comply with Article 91 CRD, which provides that
“[…] members of the management body shall possess sufficient knowledge, skills
and experience to perform their duties […] and the management body shall possess
adequate collective knowledge, skills and experience to be able to understand the
institution’s activities, including the main risks. The overall composition of the
management body shall reflect an adequately broad range of experience”.34 An
overview of relevant national transpositions is provided in Annex 2.
In its Guidelines for common procedures and methodologies for the SREP and
supervisory stress testing (EBA/GL/2022/03), the EBA provides that “[…] competent
authorities should assess whether the institutions´ information and communication
technologies are effective and reliable and whether these systems fully support risk
data aggregation capabilities at normal times, as well as during times of stress”.
The EBA Guidelines on ICT and security risk management (EBA/GL/2019/04) define
ICT and security risk as the “risk of loss due to breach of confidentiality, failure of
integrity of systems and data, inappropriateness or unavailability of systems and
data or inability to change IT within a reasonable time and with reasonable costs
when the environment or business requirements change (i.e. agility). This includes
33 Most recently in “Progress in adopting the Principles for effective risk data aggregation and risk
reporting”, Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, November 2023.
34 When taking fit and proper decisions, the ECB applies the substantive fit and proper requirements laid
down in the binding national law which implements Article 91 CRD (a minimum harmonisation
provision).

[Page 17]
17
security risks resulting from inadequate or failed internal processes or external
events including cyber-attacks or inadequate physical security.” These guidelines
include specifications on the integrity of data as well as ICT project and change
management.
Furthermore, the EBA Guidelines on internal governance (EBA/GL/2021/05) state
that “regular and transparent reporting mechanisms should be established so that
the management body, its risk committee, where established, and all relevant units
in an institution are provided with reports in a timely, accurate, concise,
understandable and meaningful manner and can share relevant information about
the identification, measurement or assessment, monitoring and management of
risks”.
The joint ESMA and EBA Guidelines on the assessment of suitability of members of
the management body (EBA/GL/2021/06) require that members of the management
body have an up-to-date understanding of the business of the institution and its risks
and, collectively, that the management body is able to understand the institution’s
activities and main risks. To this end, when assessing the knowledge, skills and
experience of a member of the management body, supervisors should give
consideration to experience relating to, among other areas, risk management, the
assessment of the effectiveness of an institution’s arrangements, the interpretation of
an institution’s financial information and the identification of key issues based on this
information. In the specific framework of collective suitability, the joint ESMA and
EBA Guidelines require that the management body collectively possess the skills to
effectively manage and oversee the institution, including, among other aspects, the
business of the institution, the main risks related to it and IT and security.
The ECB’s Report on the Thematic Review on effective risk data aggregation and
risk reporting identifies a set of best practices and areas of concerns related to the
BCBS 239 principles.
For institutions using internal models to determine regulatory capital requirements,
there are binding requirements on the quality of the main data, in particular regarding
default and historical loss information used for model development and the
quantification of risk parameters, as well as for data documentation and reporting
and supporting IT infrastructure. The ECB Guide to internal models35 includes a
granular overview of requirements from the Capital Requirements Regulation (CRR),
Commission Delegated Regulations, and other supervisory work in this area, namely
EBA draft regulatory technical standards, guidelines and BCBS principles for the key
areas of use for internal models. In particular, the ECB Guide to internal models
includes a section dedicated to data maintenance for the IRB approach, in
accordance with Articles 144(d), 174(d) and 176 CRR. With regard to internal
validation requirements for the IRB approach, in 2023 the EBA finalised the
supervisory handbook for the validation of IRB systems that covers the governance
and main responsibilities of the internal validation function as well as specific content
35 See “ECB guide to internal models”, ECB, February 2024.

[Page 18]
18
on the assessment of the modelling environment, focusing on data quality and IT
implementation.
The ECB Guide to fit and proper assessments36 specifies the ECB’s understanding
of the applicable legal framework and, thereby, its main expectations and policies
when conducting suitability assessments of members of management bodies, key
function holders and branch managers, within the scope of the applicable national
law. These include the assessment of theoretical knowledge and practical
experience from both an individual and a collective suitability perspective, taking
institution-specific and role-specific circumstances into account.
The ECB Guide on climate-related and environmental risks37 provides and explains a
series of expectations on reporting related to climate-related and environmental
risks, taking into account the EBA Guidelines on internal governance
(EBA/GL/2021/05). In this regard, the ECB expects institutions, among other things,
to systematically collect and aggregate the data needed to provide their
management bodies with risk reports assessing the impact of climate-related and
environmental risks on their business model, strategy and risk profile in a timely
manner.
From a macroprudential perspective, the European Systemic Risk Board (ESRB)
has repeatedly highlighted the importance of receiving high-quality data in order to
monitor and address financial stability risks. In the context of the reporting required
by the European Market Infrastructure Regulation, the ESRB has highlighted the
difficulties that persistent data quality issues pose for the adequate monitoring of
financial stability risks. It has made concrete proposals to improve supervisory
reporting and has called for increased supervisory attention to be paid to data
quality.38
Annex 2: National transpositions of relevant CRD IV provisions
• Belgium: Circular on the Bank’s expectations as regards quality of reported
prudential and financial data (Circular NBB_2017_27) of the Nationale Bank
van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique, which requires institutions to
establish robust governance and control frameworks on the quality of the
prudential and financial data
• Bulgaria: Articles 11(1-2), 10(4,6), 73(1), 73b(1-3) and 74(3) of the Law on
credit Institutions (Закон за кредитните институции); Article 2 of the Bulgarian
National Bank’s Ordinance No 7; Articles 4-7 and 13-14 of Ordinance No 10
• Germany: The third sentence of Section 25a(1) of the German Banking Act
(Kreditwesengesetz), the German Federal Financial Supervisory Authority’s
understanding of which is specified in module AT 4.3.4 of the Minimum
36 “Guide to fit and proper assessments”, ECB, December 2021.
37 “Guide on climate-related and environmental risks”, ECB, November 2020.
38 “ESRB’s view regarding data quality issues and risks for financial stability”, ESRB, 2022; “EMIR 3.0 /
EMIR review”, ESRB, 2023.

[Page 19]
19
Requirements for Risk Management (Mindestanforderungen an das
Risikomanagement – MaRisk)
• Estonia: Articles 82, 55, 48 of the Credit Institutions Act (Krediidiasutuste
seadus)
• Ireland: Regulations 61, 64, 79 of Statutory Instrument 158/2014 and the
Central Bank of Ireland's Corporate Governance Requirements for Credit
Institutions
• Greece: Article 66 (1-2) on robust governance arrangements, effective
processes for identifying, managing, monitoring and reporting the risks, internal
control mechanisms, remuneration policies and practices of Law 4261/2014 on
Access to the activity of credit institutions and prudential supervision of credit
institutions (transposition of Directive 2013/36/EU), repeal of Law 3601/2007,
and other provisions (Πρόσβαση στη δραστηριότητα των πιστωτικών ιδρυμάτων
και προληπτική εποπτεία πιστωτικών ιδρυμάτων (ενσωμάτωση της Οδηγίας
2013/36/ΕΕ), κατάργηση του ν. 3601/2007 και άλλες διατάξεις)
• Spain: Section 6, item 52 on data aggregation and risk reporting of Circular
2/2016 of the Banco de España
• France: Article 104 of Arrêté du 3 novembre 2014 relatif au contrôle interne des
entreprises du secteur de la banque, des services de paiement et des services
d'investissement soumises au contrôle de l'Autorité de contrôle prudentiel et de
résolution
• Croatia: Hrvatska narodna banka’s Decision on governance arrangements
(Odluka o sustavu upravljanja); Articles 103 and 104 of the Credit Institutions
Act (Zakon o kreditnim institucijama)
• Italy: First part, Title IV, Chapter 4, Section V of the Banca d’Italia’s Circular No
285/2013 on Prudential Requirements and Standards (Disposizioni di vigilanza
per le banche); Article 53 and Article 53 bis of Legislative Decree 385/1993 on
the Consolidated Law on Banking (Testo Unico Bancario)
• Cyprus: The Central Bank of Cyprus’ Directive on Internal Governance of Credit
Institutions (Η περί Εσωτερικής Διακυβέρνησης των Πιστωτικών Ιδρυμάτων
Οδηγία)
• Latvia: Financial and Capital Market Commission Regulation No. 277:
Regulation on Establishment of the Internal Control System (Iekšējās kontroles
sistēmas izveides normatīvie noteikumi)
• Lithuania: Resolutions of the board of Lietuvos bankas No 03-176 and 149
• Luxembourg: Paragraph 132, chapter II of Circular CSSF 12/552 of the
Luxembourg Financial Sector Supervisory Commission (“Commission de
Surveillance du Secteur Financier” – “CSSF”) on central administration, internal
governance and risk management; paragraph 30 of Circular CSSF 11/506 of

[Page 20]
20
the Luxembourg Financial Sector Supervisory Commission on principles of a
sound stress testing programme
• Malta: Articles 14 and 17b of the Banking Act (Chapter 371 of the Laws of
Malta), Malta Financial Services Authority’s Banking Rule BR/24 on Internal
Governance of Credit Institutions Authorised Under the Banking Act
• Netherlands: Article 3:17 of The Financial Supervision Act (Wet op het
financieel toezicht); Articles 17, 20, 23, 23a of the Decree on Prudential Rules
for Financial Undertakings (Besluit prudentiële regels Wft)
• Austria: Article 39 of the Austrian Banking Act (Bankwesengesetz) and Article
3(4) and Article 3(5) of the Austrian Financial Market Authority’s Regulation on
Credit Institute Risk Management (Kreditinstitute-
Risikomanagementverordnung)
• Portugal: Articles 115-A and 115-K of the Legal Framework of Credit Institutions
and Financial Companies; Notice of Banco de Portugal No 3/2020 (on internal
governance and internal control); Circular-Letter of Banco de Portugal No
2020/05 (Expetativas de supervisão relativas a capacidades de agregação e
práticas de reporte de dados de riscos)
• Slovenia: Chapter 6 of the Slovenian Banking Act (Zakon o bančništvu)
• Slovakia: Section 23, 24 and 27 of Act No 483/2001 on Banks and on
amendments and supplements to certain laws (Zákon o bankách a o zmene a
doplnení niektorých zákonov); Articles 2, 4, 5, 6, 7, 11(2)(b), 12(2)(e) and
13(1)(c) of the Decree of Národná banka Slovenska 4/2015 on additional types
of risk, on details of the risk management function of banks and branches of
foreign banks and on the definition of a sudden and unexpected change in
market interest rates (Opatrenie o ďalších druhoch rizík, o podrobnostiach o
systéme riadenia rizík banky a pobočky zahraničnej banky a ktorým sa
ustanovuje čo sa rozumie náhlou a neočakávanou zmenou úrokových mier na
trhu)
• Finland: Chapter 7, Section 1, Chapter 9, Sections 2 and 3 and Chapter 11,
Section 6a of the Act on Credit Institutions (Laki luottolaitostoiminnasta
Kreditinstitutslag); Chapter 6.1, paragraph 3 and Chapter 8 of the FIN-FSA
Finnish Financial Supervisory Authority’s Regulations and Guidelines 8/2014 on
Management of operational risk in supervised entities of the financial sector
(Operatiivisen riskin hallinta rahoitussektorin valvottavissa) of the Finnish
Financial Supervisory Authority
© European Central Bank, 2024
Postal address 60640 Frankfurt am Main, Germany
Telephone +49 69 1344 0
Website www.bankingsupervision.europa.eu
All rights reserved. Reproduction for educational and non-commercial purposes is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.
For specific terminology please refer to the SSM glossary (available in English only).
PDF ISBN 978-92-899-6667-2, doi:10.2866/081671 QB-05-24-202-EN-N