[Page 1]
Supervisory Statement | SS5/21
International banks: The PRA’s
approach to branch and
subsidiary supervision
July 2021
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 2]
Supervisory Statement | SS5/21
International banks: The PRA’s
approach to branch and subsidiary
supervision
July 2021
© Bank of England 2021
Prudential Regulation Authority | 20 Moorgate | London EC2R 6DA
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 3]
Contents
Introduction 1
Overall approach of responsible openness 3
General approach, size, and systemic importance 6
Information, co-operation, and controls to be effectively supervised 11
Integration and independence 23
Additional considerations for the supervision and authorisation of branches 27
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 4]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 1
Introduction
This Supervisory Statement (SS) expands on the Prudential Regulation Authority’s (PRA’s)
approach to banking supervision.1 It applies to all PRA-authorised banks and designated investment
firms that are headquartered outside of the UK or are part of a group based outside of the UK.2 In
this SS, such firms are referred to as ‘international banks’. It therefore covers those firms operating
in the UK as a subsidiary or through a branch. Accordingly, this SS replaces SS1/18 ‘International
banks: the Prudential Regulation Authority’s approach to branch authorisation and supervision’.3
Although this SS largely consolidates the PRA’s existing approach to international banks, the PRA
recognises that firms (including firms operating with deemed authorisations under the temporary
permissions regime (TPR)) may need additional time to adjust.4 Accordingly, the PRA will adopt a
proportionate approach to implementation. Firms operating under the TPR will not need to meet
the expectations in this SS immediately, but will need to do so as soon as practicable (taking into
account their individual business model and systemic impact), and in any event by the time they are
authorised by the PRA and exit the TPR. As part of pre-authorisation discussions, the PRA will expect
such firms to demonstrate how they intend to meet these expectations. The PRA expects all other
authorised firms within the scope of this SS to meet the expectations set out within a reasonable
time, taking into account the firm’s current position and the scale of change that might be required.
These firms should provide their supervisors with a clear explanation of any gaps they need to
address and their proposed timeframe for doing so.
Many of the expectations in this SS apply both to subsidiaries and to firms operating through a
UK branch. To the extent possible, this SS seeks to draw a distinction between the PRA’s
expectations which are specific to UK branches or to UK subsidiaries (rather than those that apply to
both). While this SS draws out and elaborates on matters discussed in other SSs that are particularly
relevant for international banks, it is to be read with, and does not replace, international banks’
obligations under applicable legislation, the PRA’s rules, and the expectations set out in its policy
publications.5
This SS sets out the PRA’s expectations for receiving information concerning the risks in the
wider group and co-operation from other supervisory authorities concerned with the firm or its
wider group.6 This is necessary for the PRA to be satisfied that the international bank is meeting
threshold conditions, particularly the threshold condition concerning the effective supervision of the
firm. This SS also sets out expectations of international banks in meeting the threshold condition on
the prudent conduct of business, including their systems and controls and risk management.
This SS is structured as follows:
 Chapter 2 summarises the PRA’s overall approach and the relationship between (i) a firm’s size
and systemic importance; (ii) the information, co-operation, and controls likely to be required
to be effectively supervised; and (iii) the degree of independence between UK and overseas
business.
1 October 2018:: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/pras-approach-to-supervision-of-the-banking-
and-insurance-sectors.
2 PRA designated investment firms list: www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/authorisations/which-firms-does-the-pra-
regulate.
3 March 2018: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2018/international-banks-pras-approach-to-
branch-authorisation-and-supervision-ss.
4 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/eu-withdrawal/temporary-permissions-regime.
5 Available at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/policy.
6 In this SS, references to a group include, in the case of a branch, the legal entity of which the branch forms part.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 5]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 2
 Chapter 3 then elaborates on the first of those points – the relationship between a firm’s size
and systemic importance – as well as setting out some general expectations.
 Chapter 4 expands on the information, co-operation, and controls likely to be required to be
effectively supervised.
 Chapter 5 explains how the degree of independence between UK and overseas business in the
firm or group needs to be commensurate with the two factors above and, in particular, how the
PRA may use its supervisory tools, if necessary, to ensure that this is achieved.
 Chapter 6 explains additional expectations the PRA has for firms operating in the UK through a
branch, whether or not they are part of a wider group. In particular, it sets out in more detail
the specific factors considered when deciding whether to authorise firms to undertake activities
in the UK as a branch or a subsidiary instead.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 6]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 3
Overall approach of responsible openness
The PRA’s supervisory approach is grounded in the risks to its statutory objective of promoting
the safety and soundness of PRA authorised firms, particularly by seeking to avoid adverse effects on
the stability of the financial system of the UK. The PRA has to be satisfied that a firm is capable of
meeting threshold conditions on an ongoing basis, including the requirement that it is capable of
being effectively supervised by the PRA. For international banks, this will depend in part on the risks
in the wider group being visible to the PRA, and the level of co-operation and information it is
receiving from the firm and relevant overseas supervisory and resolution authorities.7 This is
because the PRA needs to understand what risks the UK branch or subsidiary is exposed to and how
these are dependent on the business and risk profile of the rest of the firm or the group.
For UK subsidiaries of groups based outside the UK, the PRA applies the same regulatory
requirements and follows the same supervisory framework as for firms that are based in the UK and
are either not part of a group or are part of a group based in the UK. However, its supervisory
approach takes into account the links between the subsidiary and the rest of the group of which it
forms a part. Where that group is not based in the UK, the PRA will typically have less information on
the risks arising in the group, and less ready access to those responsible for group risk management.
The PRA tailors its supervisory approach according to the nature, scale, and complexity of a firm’s UK
operations and potential impact on financial stability in the UK, and also according to the extent to
which the UK operations are integrated with overseas operations. Accordingly, the PRA’s
expectations of subsidiaries of groups based outside the UK may well differ in some areas from
those of subsidiaries belonging to groups based in the UK. Details of how the PRA’s expectations
vary in this regard are set out in this SS.
For firms that operate through a UK branch, the branch forms part of a legal entity incorporated
outside the UK. It follows that its operations are necessarily dependent on those of the legal entity
as a whole. It will be subject to prudential regulation by its home state supervisory authority
according to where it is based. Unlike UK subsidiaries, the PRA applies a different set of rules to such
firms, recognising that while PRA authorisation applies to the whole firm, it is appropriate to rely on
the home state supervisor for certain aspects of supervision. The expectations that the PRA has for
information relevant to the PRA’s objectives will therefore also vary in this regard.
The Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) is the conduct regulator for all banks and investment
firms operating in the UK. Therefore, for such firms, whether operating as subsidiaries or through
branches in the UK, the FCA’s threshold conditions and conduct of business rules apply, including in
areas such as anti-money laundering. Authorisation can be granted only where both the FCA and the
PRA are satisfied that their respective requirements have been met. The FCA will independently
assess applicants against its own requirements and objectives.
Subject to these foundations, the PRA recognises the efficiency benefits that banks’
international operations can bring. As such it is open, in principle, to hosting subsidiaries of
international groups that operate a highly integrated global business model, and to allowing firms to
operate in the UK through a branch or subsidiary.
7 ‘Home jurisdiction’ and ‘home state supervisor’ refer to the jurisdiction and supervisory authority that has assumed responsibility for
consolidated prudential supervision where a firm is part of a group, together with any other jurisdiction or supervisory authority with
a regime that is particularly relevant to the way in which an international bank does business in the UK. They also include the
supervisory authority responsible for the prudential supervision of a firm with a UK branch. ‘Home resolution authority’ refers to the
resolution authority responsible for the resolution of the overall group and coordination of resolution plans.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 7]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 4
The PRA recognises that many wholesale businesses, and investment banking and trading in
particular, are operated on a global and highly integrated basis.
The PRA has different expectations for businesses that engage in retail banking activities, since
those activities tend to have a greater effect on financial stability. Additional requirements would
apply to firms that would fall within the scope of the UK’s ring-fencing regime.8 Large retail banking
activities can be more effectively supervised if they are separated from other activities in the wider
group. Above certain thresholds, the PRA will consider authorising firms as subsidiaries in the UK
rather than permitting them to operate through a UK branch, thereby increasing the separation of
the UK retail business from risks arising overseas.9 However, below the threshold at which ring-
fencing requirements apply, the PRA does not have any greater expectation for the separation of
retail business. It does, however, expect to receive more information on any financial and
operational dependencies (including cross-subsidies) between that retail business and wholesale
business, whether within the same firm or between related group entities.
The PRA’s overall approach is summarised in Figure 1 below (which may be read in conjunction
with Figure 2, which specifically covers branches).
Each element in Figure 1 is considered below in more detail.
It should be noted, however, that apart from ring-fencing requirements, there is no automatic
or fixed outcome that the PRA applies in terms of the degree of integration or separation that is
appropriate. The PRA applies a graduated set of expectations which are tailored to each firm’s
circumstances. The exact measures that the PRA may take, according to the degree of integration or
independence appropriate for a subsidiary or branch, are described in Chapter 5. The requirements
imposed by the ring-fencing regime are in addition to the PRA’s expectations concerning the
information and controls required for a firm that is a ring-fenced body to be capable of being
adequately supervised as a consequence of its membership of a wider group. Specifically, with
respect to branches, where the PRA identifies concerns that a branch would fail to meet the PRA’s
expectations for effective supervision, the PRA may exercise its powers under the Financial Services
and Markets Act 2000 (FSMA) to apply specific regulatory requirements at the level of the branch on
a case-by-case basis. These would principally be intended to ensure there are sufficient financial and
operational resources, and appropriate governance at the UK branch level.
8 https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/key-initiatives/ring-fencing.
9 One threshold is £100 million of retail and small company transactional deposits, but the PRA also considers the number of such
deposit accounts and the total potential liability to the Financial Services Compensation Scheme. See Chapter 6 for full details.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 8]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 5
Figure 1: PRA expectations for effective supervision
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 9]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 6
General approach, size, and systemic importance
The PRA has general expectations that underpin its ability to effectively supervise banks and
designated investment firms which are part of international groups or headquartered overseas.
Subject to these, the PRA’s expectations then vary according to the nature, size, and systemic
importance of the UK operations. This, coupled with the degree of information available,
effectiveness of co-operation with the home state supervisor, and controls that are in place,
influences the degree of separation or integration that is acceptable to the PRA as an operational
outcome.
General expectations for effective supervision
For firms that are part of international groups carrying on banking business in the UK, the PRA
first assesses the general factors that must be in place for effective supervision to be possible, and
then assesses the factors specific to each international bank and any group of which it is a member.
The general factors the PRA considers are:
(a) whether the home jurisdiction’s prudential supervision regime is sufficiently equivalent to the
UK regime;
(b) whether there is sufficient supervisory co-operation with the home state supervisor; and
(c) the efficacy of the arrangements for resolution. Consistent with the expectations set out in the
PRA’s Fundamental Rule 8 and the Bank of England’s (the Bank) Resolvability Assessment
Framework where relevant, these arrangements will be assessed in consultation with the Bank
as the UK resolution authority.10
a) Equivalence
The PRA assesses the degree to which the home jurisdiction’s prudential supervision regime is
equivalent, taking account of the following characteristics of the home state supervisor (this is not
an exhaustive list):
 its regulatory framework;
 powers;
 general approach to the supervision of individual firms and the consolidated group;
 information sharing;
 confidentiality; and
 the competence and independence of supervision.
The PRA will make an overall assessment of whether the home state supervisor is sufficiently
equivalent, and whether its regime is consistent with the UK regulatory framework in delivering
appropriate outcomes that meet the PRA’s objectives.11 The PRA assesses these factors in their
10 Details available at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2019/the-boes-approach-to-assessing-resolvability.
11 The PRA’s assessment of equivalence is based on the outcomes achieved and is for the purposes of authorisation and supervision by
the PRA, which is separate from advice the PRA may provide to HM Treasury where HM Treasury may make determinations of
equivalence for other purposes. The PRA may give advice to HM Treasury pursuant to Regulation 4 of The Equivalence
Determinations for Financial Services and Miscellaneous Provisions (Amendment etc.) (EU Exit) Regulations 2019 (SI 2019/541).
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 10]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 7
totality, but will place considerable weight on assessing the extent and quality of co-operation with
the home state supervisor. The PRA will take into account the supervision of individual firms
(including branches) and their consolidated group, and it will consider the nature and scale of a
firm’s activities in the UK.
The PRA’s supervisory equivalence assessments are reviewed periodically. The frequency of
review is determined by the number, size, and systemic importance of the firms from a home state.
The assessments of the home state supervisor focus on the degree to which the home state
supervisor’s regime is compliant with the Basel principles in terms of supervisory approach, tools,
and practices. In performing the assessments, the PRA will base its analysis on the Basel capital and
group supervision standards, the Basel Committee’s Regulatory Consistency Assessment Programme
reviews,12 the International Monetary Fund’s Financial Sector Assessment Programme reviews,13
and the Financial Stability Board’s (FSB) peer reviews14 where appropriate, supplemented by other
sources as necessary. The PRA will also take account of its own experiences in its interactions with
the home state supervisors. It will also be important for the PRA to factor in any conduct concerns
that the FCA may raise concerning a jurisdiction.
Where, in the PRA’s view, a home state supervisor is sufficiently equivalent but there are
weaknesses in the way the firm operates, the PRA may propose to add limitations to the nature and
scale of activities performed in the UK. In exceptional circumstances, the PRA may not be satisfied
that a home jurisdiction delivers equivalent outcomes, but may still authorise a firm to operate as a
subsidiary in the UK. However, in those circumstances the PRA will expect the UK subsidiary to
operate with a very high degree of independence from the overseas operations, and that the PRA
has a high degree of direct supervisory influence on the group in relation to the activities of the
subsidiary.
b) Supervisory co-operation
In considering whether there is sufficient supervisory co-operation with the home and other
relevant supervisors, the PRA has the following approach.
Supervisory co-operation is usually underpinned by the PRA entering into a memorandum of
understanding (MoU) with the relevant home state supervisory authority.15 These establish a formal
basis for: co-operation, including the exchange of information and investigative assistance; the
facilitation of timely and effective supervision; and for the identification of risks to the financial
system, including emergency situations.
In developing this co-operation framework, the PRA has taken account of the following Bank
for International Settlements publications: ‘High-level principles for the cross-border
implementation of the New Accord’,16 ‘Principles for effective supervisory colleges’,17 and Principle
13: Home-host relationships in ‘Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision’ 18
The PRA considers not just whether such arrangements have been agreed, but how well in
practice their aims are achieved. The high-level outcomes the PRA expects to see include:
transparency over the financial and operational resilience of the group, and the group’s capacity to
12 November 2019: https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d482.htm.
13 https://www.imf.org/external/NP/fsap/fsap.aspx.
14 https://www.fsb.org/work-of-the-fsb/implementation-monitoring/peer_reviews/.
15 The PRA has entered into a new MoU with the European Banking Authority (EBA), and MoUs with other competent authorities in the
European Economic Area (EEA), to facilitate continued supervisory co-operation and information sharing. All current MoUs are
available here: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/about/governance-and-funding.
16 August 2003: https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs100.htm
17 June 2014: https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs287.htm
18 September 2012: https://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs230.htm.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 11]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 8
support the international bank; appropriate equivalence of the home state supervision in practice;
and transparency over when and how the home state regulator might intervene to remedy non-
compliance with prudential standards along with any triggers for pre-emptive action. To achieve this,
the PRA expects there to be regular structured engagement with the home state supervisor, either
through a college or bilateral meetings or both, as appropriate, which should facilitate a technical
discussion of the material risks and risk management practices at the firm.
The degree of co-operation with the home state supervisor that the PRA expects is
commensurate with the size of the firm, the degree of cross-border integration of its business, and
the systemic nature of any wholesale branches operating in the UK.
c) The efficacy of the arrangements for resolution
This will be a factor in the PRA’s judgements when forming a view on its risk appetite towards
subsidiaries and branches operating in the UK. For subsidiaries and branches that perform critical
functions in the UK,19 the PRA, in consultation with the Bank as UK resolution authority, will assess:
 the credibility or feasibility of the home state supervisor and home resolution authority’s
approach to resolvability and resolution execution (including its compliance with the FSB Key
Attributes);20
 the ability of the PRA, in consultation with the Bank, to rely on the home state supervisor and
home resolution authority to deliver resolvability and if necessary execute the resolution
strategy for the group and firm, including the home state supervisor and home resolution
authority’s operational capability to implement a resolution and to put in place adequate co-
ordination mechanisms between home and host authorities;
 the adequacy of the group’s and firm’s resolution arrangements:
(i) for the relevant subsidiaries21, taking into account the Bank’s views as to whether the
capabilities of the resolution group would deliver resolvability outcomes that are
broadly comparable to those set out in the Statement of Policy (SoP) ‘The Bank of
England’s Approach to Assessing Resolvability’;22
(ii) for branches, although the Bank’s Resolvability Assessment Framework (RAF) does not
apply to these entities,23 the resolvability outcomes set out in the Bank’s SoP provide
relevant context for the Bank’s engagement with the PRA in respect of the
authorisation and supervision of the UK branches of overseas banking groups; and
 the willingness of the home resolution authority to share resolution plans with the PRA on
request, and to engage in a dialogue with the PRA and the Bank regarding progress on
resolvability and the implications of the resolution strategy for any UK subsidiary or branch
operating in the UK.
Structural profitability
The PRA has a minimum expectation that UK subsidiaries of international groups should be on
a path to being structurally profitable on a standalone basis (or that the group’s viability depends on
19 Critical functions are defined in section 3(1) of the Banking Act 2009. Available at:
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2009/1/section/3.
20 ‘Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions’, October 2014: www.fsb.org/wp-
content/uploads/r_141015.pdf.
21 July 2019: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2020/updates-to-the-boes-approach-to-assessing-resolvability.
22 Ibid.
23 Ibid, paragraph 2.7.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 12]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 9
supporting the UK operations). That is, they should not be solely cost centres for the group with
accumulated costs that are extinguished by periodic capital injections from the group. Rather, the
firm should be capable of accreting at least some of its own capital (or contributing to the accretion
of group capital), so that operating costs of the international bank are covered on a day-to-day basis
by income that it generates. That income may be in the form of service charges to the rest of the
group or cross-subsidies built into the pricing and funding arrangements between wholesale and
retail business in the firm or other group companies. It is important that the firm and PRA
understand the extent of such cross-subsidies in order to assess the soundness of the business. The
PRA may request that firms provide evidence that parental support will be provided and the parent
has a clear strategy to do so.
New retail businesses in particular may be loss-making, but as they mature and grow, the PRA
expects them to become more profitable and secure. Accordingly, the PRA expects to receive
information on the degree of cross-subsidy between the UK retail business and wholesale business
within the firm and between the firm and the rest of the group.
The PRA’s expectation of structural profitability for UK subsidiaries of international groups does
not preclude the use of group service companies by firms, whether engaged in retail business or
wholesale business, provided operational resilience and operational continuity expectations are
met.
Specific considerations for retail business
The consideration of retail business is of sufficient weight that the PRA considers that good
visibility of the risks in the wider group and good supervisory co-operation are not always sufficient
to mitigate risks to the PRA’s objectives without separation from the wider group. Chapter 6 of this
SS sets out the additional factors that the PRA considers when deciding whether authorisation for a
firm to operate a UK branch is appropriate, including certain thresholds above which retail deposits
may lead the PRA to conclude that separation of the UK business into a UK subsidiary would be more
appropriate (see Chapter 6). Significantly greater amounts of UK retail business may take a firm
above the threshold at which it is required to ring-fence its ‘core activities’ under Part IX B of FSMA
(as amended).24 This effectively leads to that business being required to have a further degree of
separation from the rest of the group.
Where ring-fencing is not required, the PRA does not expect any greater separation to be
necessary to mitigate risks to retail business in the UK operations. In general, the degree of
separation appropriate will therefore follow the same framework as for wholesale business, as set
out below. However, there are three areas which are worth emphasising for firms that are part of
international groups regarding their compliance with PRA rules applicable to international banks:
 When branches or subsidiaries outsource to parent or affiliated companies outside the UK, they
should ensure that the outsourced service is provided in compliance with UK legal and
24 £25 billion of ‘core deposits’, as specified in the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 (Ring-fenced Bodies and Core Activities)
Order 2014. Available at: https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukdsi/2014/9780111117118.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 13]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 10
regulatory requirements, even if these firms are bound by policies, procedures, or written
agreements set by their overseas group or parent companies.
 Depositor protection in the UK may be different from that applicable to the overseas group or
head office, and so the PRA will pay particular attention to compliance with the Depositor
Protection Part of the PRA Rulebook, including the Single Customer View Requirements.
 While the PRA does not require any separation of a firm’s retail business from the rest of the
group, or from its wholesale activities, the PRA does expect to receive information on the
degree of financial, operational, and other business dependencies (including cross-subsidies)
between the UK retail business and wholesale business within the firm, and between the firm
and the rest of the group.
Specific considerations for wholesale business
Wholesale business poses risks to financial stability, particularly when it reaches a scale in the
UK that significant losses or operational dependences could cause problems in financial markets or
the failure of other financial institutions. The PRA considers size to be a factor when deciding
whether to designate investment firms as PRA-regulated firms. The PRA’s approach to this is set out
in the SoP ‘Designation of investment firms for prudential supervision by the Prudential Regulation
Authority’.25 This SoP sets out the factors that the PRA considers, which include a firm’s total gross
assets, or the total gross assets of investment firms in the same group, exceeding £15 billion.
For international banks with UK branches undertaking wholesale business, in assessing
whether the branch is systemically important, the PRA considers (among other things) a similar
threshold, where the total gross assets attributed to the branch, and where relevant other UK
branches in the group, exceed an average of £15 billion. This is discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
25 March 2013: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2013/designation-of-investment-firms-for-
prudential-supervision-by-the-pra.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 14]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 11
Information, co-operation, and controls to be effectively supervised
Firm-specific expectations for effective supervision
The factors that the PRA considers in assessing its ability to effectively supervise a particular
international bank include whether:
(a) the PRA receives sufficient co-operation, and financial and regulatory information on the
overseas risks and financial position connected with the firm, from its group or head office and
relevant overseas supervisory authorities (see Box 1);
(b) any wider group to which the firm belongs has the capacity and willingness to support the firm;
(c) where the firm’s governance is provided by individuals with roles in a wider group, that
governance is effective in taking into account the risks to the firm and, conversely, where the
firm’s governance is provided by individuals whose only role is within the firm, those individuals
have appropriate influence within the wider group’s management;
(d) booking arrangements are transparent and effective, and the firm appropriately manages the
risks that it originates, receives, and transfers out to affiliates (see Box 2);
(e) operational resilience arrangements that are in place with other group members are sufficient,
in the case of a UK subsidiary, to allow compliance with PRA operational resilience
requirements; or, in the case of a UK branch, to assure the PRA that the services the branch
offers in the UK are operationally resilient. For branches, the PRA will consider whether the
home state’s operational resilience regime is sufficiently robust to deliver outcomes similar to
those required by the UK regime, including whether the home state supervisor has adopted the
Basel Principles on Operational Resilience and whether the firm can demostrate that it is in
compliance with its home state regime.26 The PRA will also look to gain assurance that
operational disruption at group level does not represent undue risk to the group as a whole,
and thereby provision of services by the UK business; and
(f) a credible group resolution strategy, or plans to support or wind up the firm in line with the
Bank’s resolution objectives, are in place.
a) Financial and regulatory information, and co-operation
The PRA expects to have access to certain categories of financial and regulatory information for
every international bank in order to be able to assess whether it would meet threshold conditions on
authorisation and continue to meet them on an ongoing basis, and to assess the impact that the
firm’s activities may have on the stability of the UK financial system. The level of detail will vary
according to the size and complexity of the firm’s business. The PRA also expects to receive a
broader range of information in situations where the international bank poses a higher risk to
financial stability, or where its business is more highly integrated with overseas operations and
hence more at risk from activities outside of the PRA’s direct supervision.
The PRA also follows, and expects other supervisory authorities to follow, the guidance provided
by relevant international committees (the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision in particular)
concerning supervisory co-operation. In practice, the PRA finds certain aspects particularly
conducive to constructive relationships and effective supervision. These matters of what might be
regarded as ‘good practice’ are included in Box 1 below under ‘Examples of information that the PRA
26 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision: ‘Principles for Operational Resilience’ (March 2021), at
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d516.htm.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 15]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 12
sees when a strong and co-operative relationship exists with home state supervisors and firms’.
These are illustrative rather than a substitute for internationally agreed standards of co-operation.
Appropriate visibility of group risks is achieved by a combination of an effective co-operative
relationship with the home state supervisor and appropriate information sharing by the home state
supervisor and the firm. This is particularly relevant at the point of authorisation or where a firm’s
circumstances change materially. Where the firm’s scale and operating model require the PRA to
have certain information on group risks, the PRA will first discuss the information that it requires
with the home state supervisor (with a view to the home state supervisory authority providing this
information where possible). The PRA will then discuss appropriate arrangements with the firm
concerning any additional information it requires. The PRA, in consultation with the Bank in its
capacity as resolution authority, may also require additional information from the home resolution
authority and firm regarding the resolution arrangements of firms of such size and complexity that
they may pose a higher risk to UK financial stability.
For each firm that is part of an international group, commensurate with its systemic importance
and the degree of cross-border integration of its UK business, the PRA:
 aims to contribute to the supervisory strategy for the group as a whole, and to have insight into
the group supervisory strategy, as necessary to achieve the PRA’s objectives;
 expects to agree with the home state supervisor how best to co-ordinate supervisory work
where common areas of interest are identified, and to undertake supervisory work in
conjunction with the home state supervisor. This could include joint visits to the UK subsidiary
or branch in appropriate cases where both the PRA and the home state supervisor have
prioritised work in particular areas. It could also include the PRA having direct access to
management in the international group or parent where that is relevant to the PRA’s
understanding of strategy and risks that may affect the UK operations;
 expects to have a regular and proactive exchange of supervisory assessments with the home
state supervisor, such as the results of firm visits or analyses in areas that are of particular
relevance to the UK entity;
 expects a prompt exchange of information and proactive notification of issues materially
relevant to the UK entity;
 expects to have access to information on governance and financial resilience for the firm as a
whole, and the group of which it is part, where it is relevant for the PRA’s supervision of the
international bank and the PRA’s objectives; and
 needs to be satisfied, in consultation with the Bank as UK resolution authority, that the
resolution authority or authorities in the relevant home jurisdictions for the group have
adequate powers and plans for the group’s resolution.
Box 1 sets out the additional information on group risks, beyond what it receives in respect of
the UK business, that the PRA expects to see. In broad terms, the PRA is open to discussion with the
home state supervisor and the firm as to how this information is provided. For example, it could be
provided through engagement at supervisory colleges, in a structured way as provided to or agreed
by relevant supervisory authorities, or in the form of management information prepared by the firm
for internal purposes. The PRA also has no specific expectation as to whether information prepared
by entities in the group is provided by those entities, the UK entity, or any supervisor, or whether
information prepared by supervisors is received directly from supervisors or provided by group
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 16]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 13
entities. Firms and their home state supervisors may decide the process for the provision of
information to the PRA based on their individual circumstances. In the case of the smallest firms, the
PRA will seek to obtain most of this information from the home state supervisor during its routine
supervisory engagement with the PRA and in keeping with arrangements described in an MoU
(where this exists between authorities).
In taking this approach, the PRA aims to minimise the time and effort required to produce the
information it needs from supervisory authorities, international banks, or their group entities. The
PRA acknowledges that some information, such as supervisory assessments and peer group
analyses, can only be provided by supervisory authorities. The PRA expects the information to be
refreshed periodically to ensure that it remains relevant over practical timescales and the practical
arrangements can be agreed between the home state supervisor, the firm, and the PRA.
The precise information and data that the PRA will expect to receive may change over time,
especially as events and risks crystallise. The PRA will keep its expectations under review and will
aim to be proportionate in its requests.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 17]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 14
Box 1: The PRA’s expectations for information sharing
The PRA’s expectations for access to information to ensure appropriate visibility of the financial
and operational risks of international banks
The PRA needs sufficient information on risks in the group to which the international bank belongs
to be satisfied that the threshold condition relating to the PRA’s ability to supervise the firm
effectively is met. This information may be provided by the home state supervisor or by the firm.
The information that the PRA expects to have access to will be proportionate, tailored to the firm’s
activities and structure, and focused on those group risks which have a direct bearing on the risk
profile of the international bank in the context of the PRA’s objectives (eg global trading business
lines for which risk is managed or booked to the UK entity). Some information is likely to be provided
on a regular basis and some in response to ad hoc requests or particular events.
These will vary according to:
 the firm’s potential impact on the financial stability of the UK economy;
 the degree of interconnection of the UK operations with the overseas part of the firm and group;
 whether the markets in which the firm and group operates are functioning normally or are
stressed; and
 any idiosyncratic stresses affecting the firm and its proximity to failure.
The firms and groups in respect of which the PRA would expect to receive the most information are
therefore the largest UK subsidiaries and the systemic branches, including those belonging to groups
designated as globally systemically important, and those which are most interconnected with the
group’s overseas business.
During group or market-wide stress events, the PRA will expect information from the home state
supervisor and the firm on the nature, cause, and extent of any idiosyncratic stress, and the
frequency and scope of the information shared in some key areas, notably liquidity and profit and
loss, will usually need to increase, even for small firms.
Baseline information
The PRA expects, when requested, access to certain categories of information from all international
banks, both in times of crisis and normal business, namely proportionate and timely information on:
 the nature of the firm’s and group’s business model, and any material changes in it, to the
extent that they could have a material impact upon the firm or the group’s ability or willingness
to support it.
 the financial resilience of the firm and the firm’s immediate (and ultimate, if different) overseas
parent, or the consolidated international financial group to which the firm belongs. Information
on financial resilience includes capital and liquidity positions relative to relevant regulatory
requirements;
 the operational resilience of the firm and group, including risks arising elsewhere in the group
that may affect the ability of the firm to deliver its important business services or critical
operations (such as those provided through intragroup outsourcing or other inter-affiliate
arrangements);27
 material risks to the firm’s survival emanating from any group to which it belongs, including
enforcement or legal actions;
 the group’s recovery plan, including details regarding financial and non-financial dependencies
between group entities, consistency of recovery operations, and the impact of group recovery
options on the UK firm; and
27 Important business services refers to services as defined in the Operational Continuity Part of the PRA Rulebook which applies to CRR
firms – ie UK subsidiaries of international groups. Critical operations refers to services as defined in the Basel Committee on Banking
Supervision’s ‘Principles for Operational Resilience’ (March 2021), found at https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d516.pdf, and is relevant
for UK branches.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 18]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 15
 resolution planning, including information regarding the group’s preparations for resolution
consistent with Fundamental Rule 8 (the PRA, and the Bank as resolution authority, will discuss
with one or both among the home state supervisor and home resolution authority, and then
consider if any additional information is required from the firm).
Under normal market conditions, the PRA will usually expect to receive more than this baseline of
information only for those international banks that have the potential to cause some disruption to
the UK financial system. For the smallest firms, the PRA will seek to obtain most of this information
from the firm’s home state supervisor during its routine supervisory engagement with the PRA and
in keeping with arrangements described in any relevant MoU.
Additional information expected for highly integrated or systemically significant businesses
The PRA expects to receive additional information in situations where a firm’s business model or
operations are highly integrated with its group’s overseas business and where it is significant
systemically.
Firms typically run their investment banking and trading activities on a global basis, with complex
booking arrangements (see also Box 2). The PRA needs to understand the portion of global risk that
is managed in the UK, what UK risk is managed elsewhere, and how the UK business performance
sits within the overall performance of the firm and group. For trading activities, timely information
on business line performance is a critical indicator of emerging market and firm-specific risks.
For highly integrated firms that rely on global systems, including custodians, the PRA may expect
additional information relating to group operational resilience and the performance of group IT
systems.
Examples of information that the PRA sees when a strong and co-operative relationship exists
with home state supervisors and firms
For the largest firms with the most potential impact on UK financial stability, the PRA will first
discuss with the home state supervisor what information the PRA requires and what might be
provided by the home state supervisor. The PRA will then discuss appropriate arrangements with the
firm concerning any additional information required. Illustrative examples of such information
include:
 the provision by the firm of daily or weekly profit and loss figures covering global and local
investment banking and trading business lines;
 information on the firm’s structural profitability and any material element of cross-subsidy
between business lines;
 weekly or monthly group market risk reports;
 provision by the home state supervisory authorities of the outputs from reviews, for example,
the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Processes;
 provision by the home state supervisory authorities and the firms of information on their stress
tests and how these affect the UK branch or subsidiary;28
 provision by one or both of the home state supervisory authorities and the relevant firms of
group liquidity information, regularly in business-as-usual periods and more frequently once
there is agreement that we have entered a period of market stress;
 any material change in the operational resilience of the firm or group, for example cyber-attacks,
that may affect the group systems that are used by the UK business or which threaten the
survival of the firm or group;
 material findings from internal risk or audit functions, or external audit reviews (particularly
where there are common group wide systems and controls);
28 UK investment banking subsidiaries of foreign owned banks are currently outside the UK system wide stress testing framework on
the basis that the relevant results of home state testing are shared. See Box 5 of the ‘The Bank of England’s approach to stress
testing’, October 2015, available at: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/stress-testing/2015/the-boes-approach-to-
stress-testing-the-uk-banking-system.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 19]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 16
 information on the home state and group approach to climate risks, where these may help the
PRA to understand the group risk profile and how this may affect operations in the UK; and
 from the home resolution authority or through crisis management groups, and the group’s
resolution planning information, including the group’s plans and capability to wind down trading
activities in an orderly and solvent fashion insofar as these affect UK operations.
b) Capacity and willingness to support the international bank
As regards the group’s capacity and willingness to support a subsidiary, the PRA expects UK
subsidiaries to be financially resilient on a standalone basis. But beyond this, there are situations
where the ability of the group to support other group entities, including the UK operations, needs to
be taken into account. These are, for example, where assessments need to be made of the
diversification of risks within the group and of the extent to which funding through debt at the
parent level is used to support equity at a subsidiary level, increasing reliance on distributions from
equity to service such debt. It is also a consideration when assessing intragroup large exposures and
whether parental support to entities in the wider group mitigates the risk that amounts owed to UK
subsidiaries will not be repaid. The PRA also has expectations concerning information on the firm’s
operational resilience where this depends on group systems (see paragraph 4.26).
There may be some situations where explicit guarantees of international banks are expected
from another group entity, for example with respect to an international bank’s ability to access
central bank funding.
The PRA will establish a view, at least at a minimum in qualitative terms, on the capacity and
willingness of the group to support subsidiaries in stressed scenarios, and any barriers to that
support arising from the regulatory regimes that apply to it.
The Bank already takes a similar approach when setting internal minimum requirements for
own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) for hosted subsidiaries. As set out in the Bank’s SoP ‘The
Bank of England’s approach to setting a minimum requirement for own funds and eligible liabilities,
in deciding whether to set internal MREL for a material sub-group or subsidiary above 75% scaling,
the Bank will take into account the resolution strategy applicable to the group and the credibility of
the resolution plan for delivering it, and the availability of other uncommitted resources within the
group that could be readily deployed to support the material subsidiary, among other factors.29
c) Governance and risk management
The PRA recognises the fiduciary duties of directors of subsidiaries. Subsidiary boards must also
be capable of acting in the best interests of the firm for which they are responsible, as well as
safeguarding its safety and soundness.30
The principles of good governance should apply to all PRA-regulated subsidiaries, including the
principle that boards should have sufficient independence, to help ensure they can provide effective
challenge to the business. Where a smaller and less complex subsidiary proposes not to have an
independent non-executive chair, the firm should still be able to explain how its governance
arrangements will otherwise satisfy the need for independent oversight of the executives.
Moreover, all firms have an obligation to ensure that all their directors, in particular non-executives,
act with sufficient independence of mind and ‘make their own sound, objective and independent
29 June 2018: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2018/boes-approach-to-setting-mrel-2018.
30 Section 12, SS5/16 ‘Corporate governance: Board responsibilities’, March 2016: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-
regulation/publication/2016/corporate-governance-board-responsibilities-ss.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 20]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 17
decisions and judgments when performing their functions and responsibilities’.31 The non-executive
directors on the board should hold management to account against the matters delegated, and be
able to challenge the executive effectively and promptly. Firms should have regard to the
expectations on board responsibilities outlined in SS5/16 ‘Corporate governance: Board
responsibilities’.32
The UK subsidiary or branch should establish, implement, and maintain adequate risk
management policies and procedures, including effective procedures for risk assessment, which
identify the risks relating to its activities, processes, and systems, and where appropriate, set its risk
appetite or the level of risk tolerated.33 As noted in the PRA’s approach to banking supervision,
senior management should embed the principle of safety and soundness in the culture of their
organisation.34
Where group risk management decisions are being taken which could have an effect on the UK
subsidiary or branch, those decisions should take into account the views of representatives from the
subsidiary or branch. Those representatives should be given sufficient access to, and influence in,
the relevant decision-making committee(s). Firms should take into account their size and internal
organisation and the nature, scale, and complexity of their activities when developing and
implementing policies and procedures.35
To meet the PRA’s expectations on information sharing, it is desirable to ensure appropriate
connectivity between the firm and its head office or with the parent company board. For example, in
the case of a UK subsidiary, a non-executive director from the group board may sit on the local
board (or vice versa), or the local chairs of the Risk and Audit Committees may meet regularly with
their counterparts at the parent.
Where the group has a large-scale operation comprising both a branch and subsidiary in the
UK, and together they are systemically important, then even though the PRA generally expects
branches and subsidiaries to have independent governance arrangements (to safeguard against
conflicts of interest in how risks are booked into the UK), the need for there to be a holistic view of
UK risks may be more important. In those circumstances, it may be appropriate to have either a UK
or regional Chief Executive Officer (CEO) overseeing the whole UK footprint, and potentially other
arrangements to ensure it has a comprehensive view of the risks the firm runs in the UK.36
Accountability of Senior Management Functions (SMFs)
A subsidiary should ensure that they have an appropriate number of SMFs according to its size,
complexity, and governance structure, in line with the principles outlined in SS28/15 ‘Strengthening
individual accountability in banking’.37 Firms should particularly ensure that Management
31 Joint European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) and EBA Guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the
management body, paragraph 80. Available at: https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/internal-governance/joint-esma-and-
eba-guidelines-on-the-assessment-of-the-suitability-of-members-of-the-management-body. See also the General Organisational
Requirements Part of the PRA Rulebook.
32 March 2016: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2016/corporate-governance-board-
responsibilities-ss.
33 SS4/16 ‘Internal governance of third country branches’, February 2016: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-
regulation/publication/2016/internal-governance-of-third-country-branches-ss and the General Organisational Requirements Part of
the PRA Rulebook.
34 Paragraph 42, October 2018: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2018/pra-approach-documents-
2018.
35 EBA ‘Guidelines on internal governance under Directive 2013/36/EU’, paragraph 18. Available at:
https://eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/documents/10180/1972987/eb859955-614a-4afb-bdcd-
aaa664994889/Final%20Guidelines%20on%20Internal%20Governance%20(EBA-GL-2017-11).pdf.
36 This includes consideration of group risks; see for example the Risk Control and Group Risk Systems Parts of the PRA Rulebook.
37 July 2015: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2015/strengthening-individual-accountability-in-
banking-ss.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 21]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 18
Responsibilities Maps and Statements of Responsibilities (SoR) are up to date and that
responsibilities are allocated in accordance with the Allocation of Responsibilities Part of the PRA
Rulebook and SS28/15.38
Where applicable, the PRA expects firms to allocate the responsibility for overseeing the firm’s
booking arrangements to an SMF, and record this appropriately in their Statement of
Responsibilities. Where individuals in the parent or in group entities exercise significant influence
over the management or conduct of one or more aspects of the firm’s UK regulated activities, it may
be appropriate for them to be approved as a Group Entity Senior Manager (SMF7). However, firms
have applied for individuals performing a range of functions to be approved as SMF7. Examples
include:
 group executives on the board of a UK subsidiary (including smaller firms where parent
executives may sit on a UK subsidiary board as non-executives);
 global business line heads operating as senior executives at a UK branch or subsidiary; and
 individuals who combine a global or group role with key responsibilities in the UK (and with
significant influence over the UK branch or subsidiary), such as global heads of technology,
heads of internal audit, and global heads of operations.
However, while these examples may be helpful, ultimately whether an individual requires
approval as a SMF7 is assessed by the PRA on a case-by-case basis.
In the case of a firm that has a UK systemic wholesale branch which is part of a group based
overseas, and an individual in a related group entity has significant influence over the branch’s
booking arrangements, that individual should seek approval as SMF7 (see Box 3).
Where applicable, the PRA expects firms to allocate the responsibility for overseeing the firm’s
booking arrangements to an SMF, and to record this appropriately in their SoR.
d) Booking arrangements
The PRA is open to firms operating a diverse range of booking arrangements, including globally
integrated structures, provided that they meet the PRA’s expectations as set out in Box 2.
By booking arrangements, the PRA means the front-to-back lifecycle of trading, from
origination, trade execution, risk capture and transfer, through to back-office settlement. The PRA
seeks to ensure that firms have appropriate controls for the full lifecycle of their trades. At the start
of the lifecycle, a firm should include within its control framework those traders managing the risk
directly and those facilitating the execution and delivery of risk to the firm’s balance sheet, such as
sales people or sales traders. In terms of activity, the PRA’s expectations in Box 2 relate primarily to
the trading book. However, the PRA recognises that some of items housed in the banking book will
pose similar risks given their nature, and firms should consider whether and how their booking
frameworks and controls should be extended to cover them.
38 Statements of Responsibilities are those required by section 60 (2A) of FSMA. Available at:
https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/8/section/60.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 22]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 19
Box 2: The PRA’s expectations for booking arrangements
Booking arrangements should be transparent and the firm should appropriately manage the
trading risks that it originates, receives, and transfers out to affiliates.
Transparency
For those international firms with large-scale trading businesses, characterised by global risk
management hubs, it is essential that the risks in the relevant global business, and how this affects
the risk profile of UK operations, are visible to the PRA and that the PRA and home state supervisor
have the same understanding of those risks. With a global business line, risks may crystallise
anywhere in the group. Given the UK’s role as a global centre for trading, those risks are often
observed first in the UK. Therefore, if the firm is to operate a fully integrated global business model,
the PRA needs to understand the risk profile of an entity in the context of the global business lines of
which that entity is a part.
The PRA has a number of expectations concerning how the local entity should organise its booking
arrangements in order that it meets the threshold conditions on the prudent conduct of business
and its obligations under Fundamental Rules 3, 5, 6, and 8, relating to risk management and
resolvability.
Management and controls: The PRA’s expectations
1. Firms should set out a clear rationale for their booking arrangements, document the booking
arrangements, and have them approved by the appropriate governance body.
Firms should have a policy document that sets out a clear rationale for their UK booking
arrangements, and how those arrangements align with the business model for its UK authorised
business. The firm’s arrangements should be part of a coherent strategy for the group and firm. The
policies should be drafted with sufficient coverage and detail, such that the role of the international
bank within the group’s global booking arrangements is clear.
This document should be approved by the relevant governance body in the UK. For example, this
may be the board for a subsidiary or the executive management committee for a branch.
2. Firms should have adequate systems and controls in place to ensure that intended booking
arrangements are followed in practice.
The PRA’s rules require firms to have comprehensive and proportionate controls and to review their
adequacy regularly.39 The PRA has certain expectations as to how these booking arrangements
should be controlled.
Firms should regularly assess the risks that they face due to the booking model choices they apply,
rate them as for any other risk, and consider effective mitigations, including the need for new or
modified controls. These controls should ensure that the intended booking arrangements are
followed — ie a firm’s booking policy should always be translated into appropriately enforced
controls through its control framework to avoid ambiguity. This control framework should also be
approved by the relevant governance body in the UK, as outlined in point 1 above.
For example, an international bank with a material trading business should have a mix of detective
and preventative trading controls — ie pre-trade (soft and hard block) checks and post-trade checks.
 Remote bookers (traders in non-UK entities booking onto a UK entity) should be subject to
appropriate controls and formal oversight, including an appropriate risk assessment. Where the
UK entity allows material remote booking onto its books, but the trader is not subject to direct
trader oversight by the UK entity (often called ‘orphan books’), it may be appropriate to assign
shared coverage of this remote book to a UK-based trader or to UK-based risk management
staff. This includes risks that may arise at all stages of the trade life-cycle, including back-office
settlement.
39 Including Fundamental Rules, General Organisational Requirements 2.1–2.2, Compliance and Internal Audit 2.1, Internal Governance
of Third-Country Branches 2, 6, and 8, and Risk Control.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 23]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 20
 Where a firm relies on back-to-back booking extensively, a higher degree of assurance should be
obtained through the use of automated trade mirroring, reconciliation, and monitoring
processes.
 Management information related to trades undertaken or booked in the UK, booking risks, and
compliance monitoring should be timely and comprehensive, disaggregating the relationship
between the UK entities and those of affiliates and providing measures of change. It should
distinguish between remote booking into and out of the UK entities. The management
information should be routinely shared with the appropriate committees, and any breaches of
the policy should be subject to appropriate sanctions.
Any deviations from the booking model policy should occur rarely and only by way of an explicitly
approved exception process documented in the same policy with appropriate involvement of the UK
entity.
These procedures are expected to be subject to internal audit assessment.
For an international group, the location of the resulting risks should be transparent to each legal
entity. This requires an ability for the reporting of such risks to be readily disaggregated by entity.
3. Firms with major trading activities should ensure that responsibility for ensuring that there are
appropriate controls in place to manage its booking arrangements, including remote booking,
is allocated to a senior management function.
The responsibilities for ensuring that the firm’s booking arrangements are appropriately controlled
and monitored should be explicitly set out in the statement of responsibilities for the responsible
senior management functions.
4. The international bank should have an appropriate local risk management capability.
While a firm may rely extensively on its group for booking, risk management, and other services, the
PRA considers that the firm should have sufficient risk management capabilities if it is to satisfy the
relevant threshold conditions and comply with the Fundamental Rules. In particular, it will need
adequate financial and non-financial resources, including a sufficient number of qualified staff
dedicated to the management and control of the UK branch or subsidiary. The risk management
capabilities should be explicitly considered and sized appropriately during the approval of the UK
booking model policy and the controls required, as described above.
The need for sufficient local risk management capabilities is primarily to support the entity’s
effective supervision of UK-based traders, but also aims to manage the risks to the UK entities arising
from the global booking model. For example, the UK branch or subsidiary may hold risk that has
been transferred to the UK from elsewhere in the group, rather than risk originated from UK client
business.
Where there is risk transfer onto the firm’s balance sheet, through remote or back-to-back booking
from an affiliate, there should be appropriate controls around that process. If those risks are
analogous to risks arising from dealings with external third parties, then they should be subject to
commensurate controls, as would be appropriate for direct dealings with external third parties. Staff
in the UK entity should have accountability for managing such risks.
Firms will also need sufficient local risk management capabilities if their booking structures,
exposures, and associated risk management are to be resilient in the event of interruption to the
flow of group services.
Having a portion of group risk managed in the UK is likely to facilitate an orderly group and local
resolution. The more important the international bank is to the wider group, the more likely it is that
its survival is essential to the group’s resolution.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 24]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 21
5. There should be a broad alignment of risk and returns at the entity level.
Subsidiaries should not be designed to be structurally-loss-making, but should aim to be solvent and
viable.
Firms operating in the UK may act as service providers to their groups, but they should be
appropriately remunerated for those services.
6. The firm’s booking arrangements should not be an impediment to the firm’s recovery and
resolution or to any plan to wind down trading in a solvent and orderly fashion.
While a global booking model may not be considered a direct impediment under a single point of
entry resolution strategy, it could add complexity to the restructuring of the group post resolution.
Under a multiple-point-of-entry (MPE) strategy, the inter-connectivity between the UK entity and
the group associated to a global booking could be an impediment to resolution that the firm should
address.40 Similarly, where contingency plans to be able to wind down trading books in a solvent
and orderly fashion are important to any orderly exit, recovery, or resolution strategy, the PRA
expects that the particular booking model adopted by a firm will have been fully taken into account
in those plans.
e) Operational resilience
The PRA expects international banks to understand the services they provide to external end
users in the UK, and the risk posed to the firm’s safety and soundness in the event of a severe but
plausible disruption to such services.41 The PRA expects that firms should be prepared to identify
these services to the PRA, and articulate the point at which disruption to these services poses a risk
to the firm’s safety and soundness or the financial stability of the UK (if appropriate).
The PRA considers international banks should have a sufficient understanding of the necessary
operational resources that are used to deliver such services, regardless of geographic location, in
order to adequately understand the risk posed to the firm’s safety and soundness or the financial
stability of the UK in the event of severe but plausible operational disruptions.
In addition, the PRA will consider the robustness of the home state’s operational resilience
regime, to gain assurance that operational disruption at the group level does not represent undue
risk to the group as a whole, and thereby provision of services by the UK business. This will be
particularly relevant where functions are outsourced by the international bank to other parts of its
group, and for branches, as they are not subject to the PRA’s rules on operational resilience.
f) Group-specific resolution strategy
The PRA works with the Bank as UK resolution authority to ensure that where a firm fails, it
does so in a way that avoids significant disruption to the supply of critical functions to its customers
and other counterparties. It is the Bank’s responsibility to set the resolution strategy, set MREL, and
ultimately execute any resolution, but the PRA acts in co-operation with the Bank to ensure that
firms have appropriate resolution arrangements in place as part of going concern supervision,
consistent with Fundamental Rule 8. Consequently, resolvability is an important consideration in the
PRA’s supervisory approach to international banks. The effectiveness of the home state regime and
40 MPE refers to a resolution strategy that envisages applying resolution powers to multiple entities within a group. See ‘The Bank of
England’s approach to resolution’, October 2017: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2017/the-bank-of-england-approach-to-
resolution.
41 The relevant services are, in the case of UK subsidiaries, the ‘important business services’ as defined in the Operational Continuity
Part of the PRA Rulebook, and in the case of UK branches, the PRA will, in the first instance, look to the ‘critical operations’ a firm
may have identified, as defined in the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision’s ‘Principles for Operational Resilience’ (March 2021),
available at https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d516.pdf.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 25]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 22
the credibility of a group’s resolution strategy, and the resolvability outcomes set out in the Bank’s
RAF, where relevant, are an integral part of the assessment.
The PRA will consider in particular:
 the alignment of the firm’s group resolution strategy set by the home resolution authority with
the PRA’s objectives, including whether it ensures the continuity of the firm’s critical functions
in the UK;
 the credibility and feasibility of the firm’s group resolution strategy, including a clear process to
identify and remove barriers to resolution by the home state supervisor or home resolution
authority involving the host authorities, including the PRA; and
 the adequacy of the firm’s resolution arrangements, consistent with Fundamental Rule 8 and
the RAF:
o for the relevant subsidiaries, the PRA will take into account the Bank’s assessments as
to whether the capabilities of the group would deliver resolvability outcomes that are
broadly comparable to those set out in the Bank’s SoP ‘The Bank of England’s Approach
to Assessing Resolvability’;42 and
o for branches, although the RAF does not apply to these entities, the resolvability
outcomes set out in the Bank’s SoP provide relevant context for the Bank’s engagement
with the PRA in respect of the authorisation and supervision of the UK branches of
overseas banking groups.43
42 July 2019: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2019/the-boes-approach-to-assessing-resolvability.
43 Ibid, paragraph 2.7.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 26]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 23
Integration and independence
Once the PRA has considered the effectiveness of supervision that it is possible to exercise given
the understanding it has of risks in the wider group, including the level of co-operation and
information it is receiving and the controls in place, as well as the size and systemic importance of
the international bank, it will consider whether the degree of operational integration or separation is
commensurate with those factors. The aspects of integration considered are:
(a) governance;
(b) capital and liquidity;
(c) booking risk management;
(d) operational resilience;
(e) resolution strategy; and
(f) structural profitability.
There is no automatic or fixed outcome that the PRA applies in terms of the degree of
integration or separation that is appropriate, but the PRA applies a graduated set of expectations
which are tailored to each firm’s circumstances (see also Chapter 6). The better expectations on
effective supervision are met, the more the PRA is content for a business in the UK to be highly
integrated with the wider foreign group, or with the foreign operations of the firm if it is operating
through a branch.
Where the information or co-operation the PRA receives are such that the PRA’s expectations
for effective supervision are not fully met given the degree of operational integration that an
international bank currently has, then the PRA will consider taking measures to require the UK
operations of the international bank to be more independent.
a) Governance
The PRA is likely to expect that there is a greater degree of independence of the governance
committees of an international bank subsidiary when the PRA has limited information on how much
influence is being exerted by group management, when the degree of influence that UK
management has on the group’s strategy is inadequate, or when management of the UK entity is
dominated by group strategy. This could be in the form of the proportion of independent non-
executive directors on the board of the international bank, for instance.
As set out in SS5/16, the PRA also considers it generally undesirable for some key positions on
the board of a subsidiary, such as chair, chair of the key board sub-committees, chief executive, or
finance director, to be occupied by executive members of the group or parent board. In
circumstances where these appointments may be permissible, such as for certain smaller less
complex firms, the firm should be able to explain how its governance arrangements will otherwise
satisfy the need for independent oversight of the executives.
Where the PRA has concerns about the effectiveness of supervision over UK branches owing to
their relationship with their head office, other UK branches, or UK subsidiaries, or any wider group,
additional governance requirements may be considered. For example, to ensure appropriate
governance at the UK branch level, the PRA may require the firm to apply for additional SMFs (such
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 27]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 24
as Chief Risk Officer (CRO), Chief Finance Officer (CFO), Chief Operating Officer (COO), or a group
executive under SMF7), or to create a local management committee (or equivalent) for the branch.
b) Capital and liquidity requirements
Capital
The PRA’s assessment of the PRA buffer will take into account the extent to which wider group
risks are visible to the PRA, taking into consideration the systemic importance and the degree of
integration of the international bank. Capital is not set at UK branch level.
As explained in the SoP ‘The PRA’s methodologies for setting Pillar 2 capital’, where the PRA
assesses a firm’s risk management and governance to be significantly weak, it may also set the PRA
buffer to cover the risks posed by those weaknesses until they are addressed.44 This will generally
be calibrated in the form of a scalar applied to the amount of Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) capital
required to meet the Total Capital Requirements (TCR). The scalar could be up to 40% of the total
CET1 TCR.
A firm’s exposures to entities in its own group are generally treated as exposures to a third party
and are subject to large exposure limits. Firms can however apply to the PRA for a non-core large
exposures group permission, which allows firms to apply a higher large exposure limit to certain
entities within their group provided these entities meet certain conditions.45
These permissions increase connectivity with the wider group and increase the contagion risk
to the UK entity. For this reason, the PRA will still make a wider judgement whether it is appropriate
to grant these permissions, even where the conditions are met. The PRA will consider whether group
entities are strongly incentivised to support each other, and whether the treatment is consistent
with the overall business model of the firm and furthers the PRA’s safety and soundness
objective.46
Liquidity
In deciding what liquidity guidance to give a firm under Pillar 2, the PRA will consider how
integrated the UK business is with that of the wider group, and the quality of its relationship and the
information exchange with the home state supervisor.47
The liquidity guidance may be flexed by adjusting the Pillar 2 liquidity add-ons, applying
different preferential treatments of intragroup liquidity flows in the Liquidity Coverage Requirement,
or by using committed facilities from parent entities.
Where the PRA has concerns about the liquidity position of the firm or the effectiveness of
supervision over branches, the PRA may set additional branch liquidity requirements to ensure
appropriate liquidity at the UK branch level, for example by requiring the holding of additional
liquidity to ensure sufficient resources are held locally to allow time to respond to a stress at the
branch.
44 February 2020: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2015/the-pras-methodologies-for-setting-pillar-
2-capital.
45 SS16/13 ‘Large Exposures’, June 2018: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2013/large-exposures-
ss.
46 See paragraph 3.9 of SS16/13.
47 See SoP ‘Pillar 2 liquidity’, October 2018: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2018/pillar-2-
liquidity.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 28]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 25
c) Booking risk management
The PRA has a number of high-level expectations of how firms should manage their booking
arrangements for trading activity, as set out in Box 2. These are aimed at ensuring that a firm’s
booking arrangements are transparent and well-controlled.
The PRA is open in principle to a wide range of booking models. It recognises that trading
activity is often run as a global business model. The UK entity may rely extensively on its affiliates for
business origination and for risk management services, but the UK entity remains responsible for
ensuring that the level of risk management is appropriate to the risks undertaken.
Where a firm meets the PRA’s expectations for booking models, the PRA is open to hosting
highly integrated and large-scale trading operations.
Where a firm is not able to meet these expectations, the PRA may require more local risk
management or limit the degree of connectivity that the firm has with the rest of the group so that
less risk is brought into or transferred out of the entity. The PRA may consider a firm unable to meet
these expectations if:
 its controls are not commensurate to the risks posed by a complex booking arrangement;
 there is inadequate visibility of the group risk profile, inadequate information sharing, or
inadequate home state co-operation; or
 booking arrangements would impede the execution of the resolution plan.
d) Operational resilience
The PRA expects firms to observe high standards in the management of operational as well as
financial risks. If the PRA does not have sufficient understanding of how operational resilience is
assured when an international bank is dependent on group or overseas systems and policies, then
the PRA would expect those systems or policies to be improved and made clear to the PRA, or for
the international bank to become less dependent on those systems.
e) Resolution strategy
The PRA may not have sufficient confidence regarding resolvability if, in consultation with the
Bank as resolution authority:
 the group resolution strategy lacks credibility or feasibility;
 it is not clear if it is able to rely on the home state supervisor and home resolution authority to
execute the group’s resolution strategy, including the home state supervisor and home
resolution authority’s operational capability to implement a resolution and put in place
adequate coordination mechanisms between home and host authorities; or
 it has concerns about the arrangements for the subsidiary or its resolution group to deliver
orderly resolution, taking into account the resolution outcomes that are broadly comparable
outcomes as those set out in the Bank’s RAF SoP.48
48 Paragraph 2.7 of the RAF SoP sets out that: ‘This SoP does not apply to the UK branches of overseas banking groups. The Bank
engages with international counterparts regarding the resolvability of these branches. The resolvability outcomes in this SoP will
therefore inform this engagement and so will be of interest to overseas banking groups in this context. The SoP also provides
relevant context for the Bank’s engagement (in its capacity as UK resolution authority) with the PRA in respect of the authorisation
and supervision of the UK branches of overseas banking groups’. May 2021: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/paper/2020/updates-
to-the-boes-approach-to-assessing-resolvability.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 29]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 26
Where the PRA does not have sufficient confidence over the resolvability of a subsidiary and its
resolution group, this may mean that it would be necessary for the UK subsidiary to be supervised
on a more standalone basis, consistent with a MPE resolution strategy that would be determined by
the Bank.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 30]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 27
Additional considerations for the supervision and authorisation of
branches
As discussed in Chapter 2, a branch of an international bank forms part of a legal entity
incorporated outside the UK. It follows that its operations are necessarily dependent on those of the
legal entity as a whole. PRA authorisation applies to the whole firm. However, the PRA’s approach is
to place appropriate reliance on the prudential supervision of the overseas firm by the home state
supervisor, subject to appropriate safeguards. For example, the PRA does not apply capital
requirements to a firm operating only through a UK branch, and the PRA looks to the home state
regime to apply solo capital requirements to the firm.
While the PRA’s expectations set out in Chapters 3, 4, and 5 of this SS apply to international
banks that operate in the UK via branches as well as to subsidiaries, in the case of a branch there are
additional expectations which arise since:
 there are potential risks arising in the head office or other branches of the firm which may
affect the UK branch operations;
 the PRA authorises the firm as a whole; that is, the entire legal entity and not only the UK
branch, and so the firm as a whole must meet threshold conditions; and
 there is a home state supervisory authority which will be responsible for the prudential
supervision of the firm as a whole, and with which the PRA will need to agree how each
regulator’s respective responsibilities are to be discharged in accordance with their legal duties
and, for the PRA, in a proportionate and cost-effective manner.
The matters that the PRA considers when deciding whether it may be content to authorise a
firm to operate in the UK through a branch are summarised in Figure 2 below (which was originally
published in SS1/18). This diagram should be read in conjunction with Figure 1, which relates to both
firms that are part of groups and firms that have branches.
Threshold conditions
In determining whether its threshold conditions are met, the PRA may have regard to the
opinion of an overseas regulator, if relevant, taking into account the nature and scope of supervision
exercised by it.49 The PRA will have appropriate regard to the opinion of the home state supervisor
about the firm’s compliance with the PRA’s threshold conditions when forming its own judgement.
Equivalence
The PRA’s approach to assessing supervisory equivalence for UK branches is the same as for UK
subsidiaries of foreign groups (see Chapter 3).
49 Section 55D of FSMA. Available at: https://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2000/8/section/55D.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 31]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 28
Figure 2: PRA considerations for branch authorisation
Supervisory co-operation
There are additional expectations the PRA has for co-operation concerning branches:
 The PRA will seek to establish a clear acceptance from the home state supervisor of its
prudential responsibility for branches in the UK. This will include confirmation from the home
state supervisor that the whole firm meets the PRA’s threshold conditions, and requires the
existence of a specific agreement with the home state supervisor on the split of responsibilities
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 32]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 29
for prudential supervision of branches from that jurisdiction. The latter typically covers the
performance of respective supervisory tasks and responsibilities, the reliance each supervisor
may place on the other, co-operation and information sharing, meetings with and information
requests to the firm, and how each risk element will be assessed.
 The PRA will expect there to be agreement concerning the information required from the home
state supervisor in relation to the firm, which may include information on liquidity; this
supplements the whole-firm liquidity information that the PRA expects the firm to provide.50
Both would be subject to periodic review to ensure each authority is meeting the other’s
expectations.
Groups with both UK subsidiaries and UK branches
Where firms operate in the UK with both a subsidiary and a branch (or one or more of each), the
PRA expects appropriate governance to oversee and manage the linkages between the entities.51 In
supervising these firms, the PRA will delineate its supervision between the entities, and expect the
firm to have a clear booking arrangement in place setting out what it will book in each entity and
how its application will be verified.
Resolution
The assessment of the home state resolution framework for UK branches is the same as for UK
subsidiaries of foreign groups (see Chapter 3), but in addition the PRA considers whether depositors
of the UK branch will receive fair treatment under the home jurisdiction’s insolvency and resolution
regime.
The PRA will also assess the group resolution strategy and broader resolution arrangements in
a similar way to that of UK subsidiaries of foreign groups (see Chapter 4). In particular, the PRA will
take into account the Bank’s assessments as to whether the group resolution strategy would deliver
orderly resolution in the UK, with reference to the provisions set out in the Bank’s RAF.
Treatment of UK depositors and creditors
While the PRA, in consultation with the Bank as UK resolution authority, can gain assurance
over resolution plans and the stated intentions of the home state supervisor and home resolution
authority, doubts may remain over the certainty with which these plans will be applied in practice.
The PRA’s starting point is that UK creditors and depositors should be treated equally with their
home state equivalents. Where that is not, or may not, be the case, the PRA will consider the impact
on its objectives in deciding what action, if any, to take.
If there is a legally clear form of domestic depositor preference, then this is a known risk that
can be assessed.52 However, the PRA will also take account of two related risks that are harder to
assess:
 the risk of short-notice legislative change in the home jurisdiction during a crisis that is intended
to favour domestic depositors or creditors; and
50 SS1/17 sets out the PRA’s expectations for liquidity reporting by PRA-regulated branches of third-country and non-EEA credit
institutions and designated investment firms, February 2017: www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-
regulation/publication/2017/supervising-international-banks-the-pras-approach-to-branch-supervision-liquidity-reporting-ss.
51 SS4/16 ‘Internal governance of third country branches’, February 2016: www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-
regulation/publication/2016/internal-governance-of-third-country-branches-ss.
52 FSA Consultation Paper 12/23, ‘Addressing the implications of non-EEA national depositor preference regimes’, September 2012:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2013/addressing-the-implications-of-non-eea-national-
depositor-preference-regimes.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 33]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 30
 the risk that, actual administrative discrimination against foreign depositors or creditors takes
place during the post-failure liquidation or resolution process.
The PRA’s preferred approach is to gain assurance that the home resolution authority’s
resolution regime will deliver the appropriate outcomes for the PRA’s and the Bank’s objectives as
UK resolution authority. In the absence of adequate levels of assurance, the PRA will likely not be
prepared to host such a branch from that jurisdiction.53 In the case of an international bank
operating through an existing branch, it may be required to establish a UK subsidiary. If there is
insufficient assurance over the home state resolution arrangements, this may in turn mean that it
would be necessary for the firm to be supervised on a more standalone basis consistent with a MPE
approach to resolution.
Approach to significant retail activities
In general, the PRA will not be content for branches to undertake retail banking activities
beyond the levels described in the next paragraph. This ensures that the PRA is able to meet its
supervisory objectives and mitigate the risks to UK financial stability.
In assessing whether the PRA will be content for an international bank to undertake retail
activities in the UK through a branch, the PRA will make a determination based on the following:
 the value and type of account: while this is not a hard threshold and may vary on a firm-by-firm
basis, the PRA expects branches to have under £100 million of retail and small company54
transactional or instant access account balances covered by the Financial Services
Compensation Scheme (FSCS);55
 the number of customers: in addition to the value of deposits, the PRA will also take into
account the number of customers. Where branches have in aggregate more than 5,000 retail
and small company customers with accounts that are used for transactional purposes, this may
be of concern, though this may differ on a firm-by-firm basis;
 planned growth: while a branch’s existing retail deposits could be within the PRA’s appetite, the
PRA may conclude that the branch’s plans to grow retail deposits are outside its risk appetite.
The PRA’s approach to authorising and supervising international banks that propose to
undertake significant retail banking activities through branches is also driven by the fact that eligible
deposits of these branches are covered by the FSCS. In the event of failure, if the FSCS were unable
to recoup the amount it paid out via the bank insolvency procedure from recoveries, ultimately
there would be a liability to the UK financial system. Given this, the PRA will not, in general, be
content for a branch to undertake deposit activity where the total potential liability to the FSCS in
relation to covered deposits (as defined in the Depositor Protection Part of the PRA Rulebook) is in
excess of £500 million.
53 The Bank has certain resolution powers over branches, including the power to resolve branches on a standalone basis in certain
circumstances.
54 A ‘small company’ is defined as under the Companies Act 2006:
http://www.legislation.gov.uk/ukpga/2006/46/part/15/chapter/1/crossheading/companies-subject-to-the-small-companies-regime.
This definition is used here for supervisory purposes only, and firms should use this definition for their branch return submissions.
For the avoidance of doubt, the definition of ‘micro, small and medium-sized enterprises’ for the purposes of the Depositor
Protection Part of the PRA Rulebook remains unchanged.
55 In general, the PRA starts from the understanding that an account, while it may have transactional functionality, is only considered a
‘transactional account’ if withdrawals from it have been made nine or more times within a three month period, but it may
additionally consider other factors. The PRA will continue to take a pragmatic, judgement-based view as to whether the accounts are
transactional in practice.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 34]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 31
The PRA expects new branches of international banks operating in the UK to focus primarily on
wholesale banking activities.
Where the PRA requires an international bank to use a subsidiary in order to undertake retail
banking activities in the UK beyond certain levels, it does not automatically mean that the Bank, as
resolution authority, would expect to apply its resolution powers on the subsidiary in the event of
failure. This reflects the fact that it may be consistent with the PRA’s objectives to gain greater
supervisory influence over a firm, even if the test for use of stabilisation tools is different. The actual
approach taken to resolve a firm will depend on the circumstances at the time of its failure.
Approach to systemic wholesale branches
Given the cross-border nature of many wholesale banking activities, wholesale branches tend
to involve greater complexity in terms of structures, business models, and booking arrangements.
Accordingly, where they may become of systemic importance, the PRA has additional expectations.
Systemic importance
The PRA will identify wholesale branches as systemically important when their size, complexity,
and interconnectedness indicate that the failure of the firm could have significant consequences for
financial stability in the UK. The PRA will inform the firm in cases where its wholesale branch is
determined to be systemically important.
As its starting point, the PRA will have regard to the size of a firm’s UK footprint in deciding
whether to determine that a wholesale branch is systemically important, specifically whether it
exceeds an average of £15 billion total gross assets. In calculating this figure, the PRA will take
account both of assets booked onto the balance sheet of the branch, and assets traded or originated
in the UK but booked remotely to another jurisdiction. The PRA will use the data provided in the
Branch Return to assist in determining whether the wholesale branch is systemically important.56
Where a group maintains more than one UK branch, the PRA will aggregate the UK footprint of
those branches to assess the overall significance of the UK branches of the group. Where a group
also maintains a UK branch of an investment firm, the PRA may also take into account the assets of
that branch.
The PRA’s assessment will also take account of the likelihood that a firm will exceed the
threshold in future.
The £15 billion threshold is only indicative. In determining systemic importance, the PRA will
also focus on the overall complexity and interconnectedness of the business undertaken in the
branch, including where a branch provides significant operational services or is otherwise
interconnected to a systemically important UK bank. It will also take account of the level of provision
of critical functions the branch undertakes.
Box 3 sets out the PRA’s expectations of systemic wholesale branches.
Box 3: The PRA’s expectations of systemic wholesale branches
Expectations of systemic wholesale branches
56 See: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/regulatory-reporting/regulatory-reporting-banking-sector/banks-
building-societies-and-investment-firms.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 35]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 32
Whereas the PRA expects all branches’ organisational arrangements to be comprehensive yet
proportionate to the nature, scale, and complexity of their business, the PRA has additional
expectations for systemic wholesale branches.57
Where the PRA identifies wholesale branches as being of systemic importance to the UK, the
intensity of the PRA’s supervision of the branch will generally be greater, and the PRA’s expectations
of its organisational arrangements will be higher. The specific arrangements will vary across firms,
but the PRA has the following general expectations.
Supervisory engagement
Systemic wholesale branches are among those firms for whom the PRA has a continuous assessment
programme. This programme includes an assessment of the business undertaken by the branch, the
authorised entity of which it is part, and the group. It also includes consideration of booking
arrangements as set out in Box 2. This assessment informs the depth and nature of the information
and engagement the PRA expects from both the home state supervisor and the branch.
The PRA will look to the Head of Overseas Branch (SMF19) to ensure it receives the requisite
information it expects for all branches. For systemic wholesale branches, as part of its supervisory
programme, the PRA will expect to meet at least annually as part of existing annual meetings with
the CEO or the CRO, or both, of the authorised entity of which the branch is part, to discuss the
PRA’s expectations on information sharing, as outlined in Box 1, for the firm.
Governance
All branches must have the SMF19 approved by the PRA, with FCA consent. Individual(s) performing
the SMF19 should have the highest degree of individual decision-making authority within the branch
over activities and areas subject to UK regulation.
For systemic wholesale branches, the person exercising SMF19 is expected to be a senior figure
within the firm, who is credible and influential at the group executive level. That person should be
well-informed on group developments and how these will affect the operations of the branch. This
person should be in a position to ensure that the PRA receives the information set out in Box 1
where this information can be provided by the firm.
In addition to having such an individual holding the SMF19 function, systemic wholesale branches
should consider, whether they need the following SMFs: CROf (SMF4), CFO (SMF2), and COO
(SMF24). The PRA may also expect or require the firm to have these positions in respect of the
branch.
Where an individual based in the head office of the firm, or in another undertaking which is a
member of the firm’s group, has significant influence over the branch’s booking arrangements, then
that individual should seek approval as Group Entity Senior Manager function (SMF7). This includes
where there is a group executive responsible for firm-wide systems or operations upon which the
branch relies (for example, in custody, which is often run as a globally integrated activity). However,
where other persons provide the appropriate connectivity with the authorised entity or group, the
PRA may judge that this may not be necessary (for example, where the branch manager is on the
firm’s executive committee).
Risk management
A branch should establish, implement, and maintain adequate risk management policies and
procedures, including effective procedures for risk assessment, which identify the risks relating to
the branch’s activities, processes, and systems, and where appropriate, set its risk appetite or the
57 See SS4/16 ‘Internal governance of third country branches’, February 2016: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-
regulation/publication/2016/internal-governance-of-third-country-branches-ss.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss

[Page 36]
International banks: The PRA’s approach to branch and subsidiary supervision July 2021 33
level of risk tolerated by the branch.58 For systemic wholesale branches, the PRA will expect to see
evidence of this and to understand the firm’s policies governing the nature and amount of risk
associated with business undertaken through the branch. It can do this either through seeing
policies written at the branch level, or policies written for the firm as a whole, which identify how
the branch risks are to be managed.
The PRA expects these policies to set out criteria against which to judge whether business should be
undertaken through the branch or elsewhere in the firm. These policies should include an
assessment of non-financial risks (legal, reputational, conduct, operational, etc) that may arise
through branch activities.
The branch should have in place the appropriate governance for booking policies and controls that
mirror those set out in Box 2, which describes booking arrangements as between different entities
within a group. In the case of international banks with UK branches, the arrangements should
differentiate between what is booked to the firm’s head office and what is booked to the UK branch.
UK footprint
Where a systemic wholesale branch operates in the UK alongside a material subsidiary, the PRA
expects there to be controls around the division of risks accepted though the subsidiary and the
branch (for example, in the supply of key services between those entities and in the booking of
higher risk and unprofitable business). While there is scope for key risk management function-
holders to combine roles across the UK entities (subsidiary and branch), firms will need to ensure
that any conflicts of interest that may arise for the function holder as a result are appropriately
managed.
58 See SS4/16 ‘Internal governance of third country branches’, February 2016: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-
regulation/publication/2016/internal-governance-of-third-country-branches-ss.
This SS has been superseded on 20 May 2025. Please visit:
https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/prudential-regulation/publication/2021/july/pra-approach-to-branch-and-subsidiary-supervision-ss