[Page 1]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
EBA/GL/2021/05
2 July 2021
Final Report on
Guidelines
on internal governance under Directive 2013/36/EU

[Page 2]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
1
Contents
Executive Summary 3
Background and rationale 4
1. Compliance and reporting obligations 13
Status of these guidelines 13
Reporting requirements 13
2. Subject matter, scope and definitions 14
Subject matter 14
Addressees 14
Scope of application 14
Definitions 15
3. Implementation 17
Date of application 17
Repeal 17
4. Guidelines 18
Title I – Proportionality 18
Title II – Role and composition of the management body and committees 19
1 Role and responsibilities of the management body 19
2 Management function of the management body 22
3 Supervisory function of the management body 22
4 Role of the chair of the management body 24
5 Committees of the management body in its supervisory function 24
5.1 Setting up committees 24
5.2 Composition of committees 25
5.3 Committees’ processes 26
5.4 Role of the risk committee 27
5.5 Role of the audit committee 28
5.6 Combined committees 29
Title III – Governance framework 30
6 Organisational framework and structure 30
6.1 Organisational framework 30
6.2 Know your structure 30
6.3 Complex structures and non-standard or non-transparent activities 32
7 Organisational framework in a group context 33
8 Outsourcing policy 35

[Page 3]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
2
Title IV – Risk culture and business conduct 35
9 Risk culture 35
10 Corporate values and code of conduct 36
11 Conflict of interest policy at institutional level 38
12 Conflict of interest policy for staff 39
12.1 Conflict of interest policy in the context of loans and other transactions with members of
the management body and their related parties 41
12.2 Documentation of loans to members of the management body and their related parties and
additional information 42
13 Internal alert procedures 43
14 Reporting of breaches to competent authorities 45
Title V – Internal control framework and mechanisms 46
15 Internal control framework 46
16 Implementing an internal control framework 47
17 Risk management framework 48
18 New products and significant changes 50
19 Internal control functions 51
19.1 Heads of the internal control functions 51
19.2 Independence of internal control functions 52
19.3 Combination of internal control functions 52
19.4 Resources of internal control functions 52
20 Risk management function 53
20.1 RMF’s role in risk strategy and decisions 54
20.2 RMF’s role in material changes 54
20.3 RMF’s role in identifying, measuring, assessing, managing, mitigating, monitoring and
reporting risks 54
20.4 RMF’s role in unapproved exposures 55
20.5 Head of the risk management function 55
21 Compliance function 56
22 Internal audit function 57
Title VI – Business continuity management 59
Title VII – Transparency 60
Annex I – Aspects to take into account when developing an internal governance policy 62
5. Accompanying documents 64
5.1. Draft cost-benefit analysis/impact assessment 64
5.2. Summary of responses to the consultation and the EBA’s analysis 66

[Page 4]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
3
Executive summary
In recent years, internal governance issues have received increas ed attention from various
international bodies. Their main aim has been to correct institutions’ weak or superficial internal
governance practices, as identified during the financial crisis. Recently, there has been a greater
focus on conduct-related shortcomings, including compliance with the framework to prevent money
laundering and terrorist financing and activities in offshore financial centres.
Sound i nternal governance arrangements are fundamental if institutions, individually and the
banking system they form , are to operate well. Directive 2013/36/EU, as amended by
Directive 2019/878/EU, reinforces the governance requirements for institutions and in particular,
stresses the responsibility of the management body for sound governance arrangements ; the
importance of a strong supervisory function that challenges management decision-making; and the
need to establish and implement a sound risk strateg y, risk appetite and risk management
framework.
To further harmonise institutions’ internal governance arrangements, processes and mechanisms
within the EU in line with the requirements introduced by Directive 2013/36/EU, the European
Banking Authority (EBA) is mandated by Article 74(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU, to develop guidelines
in this area. The guidelines apply to all institutions regardless of their governance structures (unitary
board, dual board or other structure), without advocating or preferring any specific structure. The
terms ‘management body in its management function’ and ‘management body in its supervisory
function’ should be interpreted throughout the guidelines in accordance with the applicable law
within each Member State.
The guidelines complete the various governance provisions in Directive 2013/36/EU, taking into
account the principle of proportionality, by specifying the tasks, responsibilities and organisation of
the management body, and the organisation of institutions, including the need to create transparent
structures that allow for supervision of all their activities ; the guidelines also specify further the
requirements under Directive 2013/36/EU aimed at ensuring the sound management of risks across
all three lines of defence and, in particular, set out detailed elements for the second line of defence
(the independent risk management and compliance function) and the third line of defence (the
internal audit function).
The guidelines are based on an earlier set of guidelines on internal governance and in particular add
additional elements that aim to foster a sound risk culture implemented by the management body,
to strengthen the management body’s oversight of the institution’s activities and to strengthen the
risk management frameworks of institutions, e.g. by including the aspect of AML/TF risk factors.

[Page 5]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
5
Background and rationale
1. Trust in the reliability of the financial system is crucial for its proper functioning and a
prerequisite if it is to contribute to the economy as a whole. Consequently, effective internal
governance arrangements are fundamental if institutions, individually and the banking system
they form, are to operate well.
2. In recent years, internal governance issues have received increased attention from various
international bodies. Their main aim has been to correct institutions’ weak or superficial
internal governance practices, as identified during the financial crisis. These faulty practices,
while not a direct trigger for the financial crisis, were closely associated with it and were
questionable. In addition , recently, there has been a greater focus on conduct-related
shortcomings and activities in offshore financial centres.
3. In some cases, at the time of the financial crisis the absence of effective checks and balances
within institutions resulted in a lack of effective o versight of management decision-making,
which led to short -term oriented and excessively risky management strategies. Weak
oversight by the management body in its supervisory function has been identified as a
contributing factor . The management body, both in its management function and, in
particular, in its supervisory function, might not have understood the complexity of the
business and the risks involved, consequently failing to identify and constrain excessive risk-
taking in an effective manner.
4. Internal governance frameworks, including internal control mechanisms and risk
management, were often not sufficiently integrated within institutions or groups. There was
a lack of a uniform methodology and terminology, so that a holistic view of all risks did not
exist. Internal control functions often lacked appropriate resources, status and/or expertise.
5. Conversely, sound internal governance practices helped some institutions to manage the
financial crisis significantly better than others. These practices included the setting of an
appropriate risk strategy and appropriate risk appetite levels, a holistic risk management
framework and effective reporting lines to the management body.
6. Against this background, there is a clear need to address the potentially detrimental effects
of poorly designed internal governance arrangements on the sound management of risk, to
ensure effective oversight by the management body, in particular in its supervisory function,
to promote a sound risk cu lture at all levels of institutions and to enable competent
authorities to supervise and monitor the adequacy of internal governance arrangements.

[Page 6]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
5
Legal basis
7. The guidelines apply in the same way to institutions as to investment firms that are subject to
Title VII of Directive 2013/36/EU1 as amended by Directive 2019/878/EU2 in application of
Article 1(2) and (5) of Regulation 2019/2033/EU.
8. To further harmonise institutions’ internal governance arrangements , processes and
mechanisms within the EU, the EBA is mandated by Article 74(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU to
develop guidelines in this area.
9. Article 74(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU, requires institutions to have robust governance
arrangements, including a clear organisational structure with well-defined, transparent and
consistent lines of responsibility.
10. Article 76 of Directive 2013/36/EU set s out requirements for the involvement of the
management body in risk management, the setting up of a risk committee for significant
institutions, and the tasks and organisation of the risk management function. In addition, this
article establishes ‘that the head of the risk management function shall be an independent
senior manager with distinct responsibility for the risk management function’. To reflect the
wording of the directive, the revised guidelines refer, regarding the second line of defence, to
the ‘(independent) risk management function’, while the previous guidelines used the term
‘(independent) risk control function’. However, it should be remembered that business lines
or units, as the first line of defence, have a material role in ensuring robust risk management
and compliance within an institution.
11. Article 88 of Directive 2013/36/EU sets out the responsibilities of the management body
regarding governance arrangements, including the segregation of duties in the organisation
and the prevention of conflicts of interest. Moreover, the directive sets out that Member
States shall ensure that data on loans to members of the management body and their related
parties are properly documented and made available to competent authorities upon request.
Significant institutions are obliged under Paragraph 2 of this article to set up a nomination
committee, unless under national law, the management body does not have any competence
in the process of selection and appointment of any of its members.
12. Under Article 109(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities must require
institutions to meet the obligations set out in Articles 74 to 96 of that directive on an
individual basis, unless competent authorities make use of the derogations a s defined in
Article 7 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 as amended by Regulation (EU) No 2019/876 and/or
1 Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit
institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms, amending Directive 2002/87/EC
and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC
2Directive (EU) 2019/878 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 2019 amending Directive 2013/36/EU
as regards exempted entities, financial holding companies, mixed financial holding companies, remuneration, supervisory
measures and powers and capital conservation measures

[Page 7]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
5
waivers for institutions permanently affiliated to a central body in compliance with Article 21
of Directive 2013/36/EU.
13. Under Article 109 (2) of Directive 2013/36/EU these guidelines apply on a sub-consolidated
or consolidated basis. For this purpose, parent undertakings and subsidiaries subject to
Directive 2013/36/EU must ensure that internal governance arrangements, processes and
mechanisms in t heir subsidiaries are consistent, well integrated and that the governance
arrangements on a consolidated basis are robust . In particular, it should be ensured that
parent undertakings and subsidiaries subject to this directive implement such arrangements,
processes and mechanisms in their subsidiaries not subject to this directive, including those
established in third countries, including offshore financial centres . These arrangements,
processes and mechanisms must also be consistent and well integrated and those subsidiaries
not subject to this directive must also be able to produce any data and information relevant
to the purpose of supervision . As set out in Article 109(2) CRD, subsidiary undertakings that
are not th emselves subject to this directive shall comply with their sector -specific
requirements on an individual basis.
14. In accordance with Article 109(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU, the requirement under
Article 109(2) of this directive to ensure the application of Articles 74 to 96 of the directive
also in subsidiaries not themselves subject to this directive does not apply only , if the EU
parent institution can demonstrate that the application is unlawful under the law of the third
country where the subsidiary is established . With regard to the application of the
remuneration requirements laid down in Articles 92, 94 and 95 of Directive 2013/36/EU,
Article 109(4) of that directive foresees that th ose provisions sh ould not apply on a
consolidated basis to subsidiaries that are not themselves subject to this directive under
certain specific conditions3.
15. Under Article 123(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities must require
institutions to have in place adequate risk management processes and internal control
mechanisms, including sound reporting and accounting procedures in order to identify,
measure, monitor and control transactions with their parent mixed-activity holding company
and its subsidiaries appropriately.
16. In line with Article 47 of Directive 2013/36/EU, branches in a Member State of credit
institutions authorised in a third country should be subject to equivalent requirements to
those applicable to institutions within the Member State where the branch is located, taking
into account, regarding internal governance arrangements, that the branch does not have a
management body, but persons who are responsible for effectively directing the business.
17. These guidelines should be read in conjunction with other relevant EBA guidelines, including
the EBA guidelines on outsourcing arrangements, the joint EBA and European Securities and
Markets Authority (ESMA) guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the
3 See EBA guidelines on sound remuneration policies

[Page 8]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
5
management body and key function holders, the EBA guidelines on sound remuneration and
the EBA guidelines on the supervisory review and evaluation process (SREP).
Rationale and objective of the guidelines
18. Internal governance includes all standards and principles concerned with setting an
institution’s objectives, strategies and risk management framework; how its business is
organised; how responsibilities and authority are defined and clearly allocated; how reporting
lines are set up and what information they convey; and how the internal control framework
is organised and implemented, including accounting procedures and remuneration policies.
Internal governance also encompasses sound information technology systems, outsourcing
arrangements and business continuity management.
19. Combating money laundering and terrorist financing is essential for maintaining stability and
integrity in the financial syst em. Uncovering involvement of a n institution in money
laundering and terrorist financing might have an impact on its viability and the trust in the
financial system. Together with the authorities and bodies (e.g. AML supervisors and financial
intelligence units) responsible for ensuring compliance with anti -money laundering rules
under Directive (EU) 2015/849, competent authorities have an important role to play in
identifying and tackling weaknesses. In this context, the guidelines clarif y in line with
Directive 2013/36/EU that identifying, managing and mitigating money laundering and
financing of terrorism risk is part of sound internal governance arrangements and credit
institutions’ risk management framework.
20. In the same way institutions should take into account environmental, social and governance
(ESG) risk factors within their risk management framework.
21. Directive 2013/36/EU sets out requirements aim ed at remedying weaknesses that were
identified during the financial crisis regarding internal governance arran gements and in
particular the sound management and oversight of risks. Identified weaknesses included in
particular a lack of effective oversight by the management body, in particular in its supervisory
function, limited accessibility of the supervisory fu nction and shortcomings regarding the
authority, stature and resources of the risk management function.
22. In addition, it is also necessary to take into account developments in this area since the
publication of the revised EBA guidelines on internal governance in 2017, such as the updated
OECD principles of corporate governance 4 and the revised corporate governance principles
for banks published by the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS)5. The guidelines
align the terminology used regarding risk appetite and risk tolerance with the EBA guidelines
on common procedures and methodologies for the SREP and also with the revised BCBS
principles; they use the term ‘risk appetite’ to refer to the aggregate level of risk and the types
4 The OECD principles can be found at http://www.oecd.org/corporate/principles-corporate-governance.htm.
5 The BCBS guidelines can be found at http://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d328.htm.

[Page 9]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
5
of risk an institution is willing to assume, while ‘risk capacity’ is the maximum amount of risk
an institution is able to assume.
23. The guidelines are intended to apply to all existing board structures without interfering with
the general allocation of competences in accordance with national company law or
advocating any particular structure. Accordingly, they should be applied irrespective of the
board structure used (a uni tary and/or a dual board structure and/or another structure)
across Member States. The management body, as defined in Points (7) and (8) of Article 3(1)
of Directive 2013/36/EU, should be understood as having management (executive) and
supervisory (non-executive) functions.
24. The terms ‘management body in its management function’ and ‘management body in its
supervisory function’ are used throughout these guidelines without referring to any specific
governance structure, and references to the management (exec utive) or supervisory (non-
executive) function should be understood as applying to the bodies or members of the
management body responsible for that function in accordance with national law.
25. In Member States where the management body delegates, partially o r fully, the executive
function to a person or an internal executive body (e.g. a chief executive officer ( CEO),
management team or executive committee), the persons who perform those executive
functions and direct the business of the institution on the basis of that delegation should be
understood as constituting the management function of the management body. For the
purposes of these guidelines , any reference to the management body in its management
function should be understood as including also the mem bers of the executive body or the
CEO, as defined in these guidelines, even if they have not been proposed or appointed as
formal members of the institution’s governing body or bodies under national law.
26. The management body is empowered to set the institution’s strategy, objectives and overall
direction, and oversees and monitors management decision-making. The management body
in its management function directs the institution. Senior management is accountable to the
management body for the day-to-day running of the institution. The management body in its
supervisory function oversees and challenges the management function and provides
appropriate advice. The oversight role s include reviewing the performanc e of the
management function and the achievement of objectives, challenging the strategy , and
monitoring and scrutinising the systems that ensure the integrity of financial information as
well as the soundness and effectiveness of risk management and internal controls.
27. Taking into c onsideration all existing governance structures provided for by national laws,
competent authorities should ensure the effective and consistent application of the
guidelines in their jurisdictions in accordance with the rationale and objectives of the
guidelines themselves. For this purpose, competent authorities m ay clarify the governing
bodies and functions to which the tasks and responsibilities set forth in the guidelines pertain,
when this is appropriate to ensure the proper application of the guidelines in accordance with
the governance structures provided for under national company law.

[Page 10]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
5
28. Independent directors within the supervisory function of the management body helps to
ensure that the interest s of all internal and external stakeholders are considered and that
independent judgement is exercised where there is an actual or potential conflict of interest6.
29. With regard to the composition of committees and, in particular, with regard to independent
members, the guidelines are in line with the BCBS principles on corporate governance, which
set out guidance for the largest institutions. To take into account the principle of
proportionality, simpler elements have been introduced for smaller institutions.
30. The guidelines are consistent with the ‘three lines of defence ’ model in identifying the
functions within institutions responsible for addressing and managing risks.
31. The business lines, as part of the first line of defence, take risks and are responsible for their
operational management directly and on a permanent basis. For that purpose, business lines
should have appropriate processes and controls in place that aim to ensure that risks are
identified, analysed, measured, monitored, managed, reported and kept within the limits of
the institution’s risk appetite and that the business activities are in compliance with external
and internal requirements.
32. Not only busin ess lines, but also o ther functions or units, e.g. HR, legal or information
technology, are responsible for managing their risks and having appropriate controls in place.
Other functions or units are mainly exposed to operational and reputational risks that must
be considered by the compliance function and risk management func tion when forming an
enterprise-wide holistic view on all risks. All other functions or units should also be subject to
the monitoring and oversight by the independent risk management and compliance function
on a risk-based approach.
33. The risk management function and compliance function form the second line of defence .
Institutions may set up additional specific control functions (e.g. IT security control or AML
compliance function). The risk management function (referred to in the previous guidelines
as the ‘ risk control function ’) facilitates the implementation of a sound risk management
framework throughout the institution and has responsibility for further identify ing,
monitoring, analysing, measuring, managing and reporting risks and forming a holistic view
on all risks on an individual and consolidated basis . It challenge s and assists in the
implementation of risk management measures by the business lines in order to ensure that
the process and controls in place at the f irst line of defence are properly designed and
effective. The compliance function monitors compliance with legal requirements and internal
policies, provides advice on compliance to the management body and other relevant staff,
and establishes policies and processes to manage compliance risks and to ensure compliance.
Both functions may intervene to ensure the modification of internal control and risk
management systems within the first line of defence where necessary.
6 In this regard, the guidelines are based on the Commission Recommendation of 15 February 2005 on the role of non -
executive or supervisory directors of listed companies and on the committees of the (supervisory) board.

[Page 11]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
5
34. The independent internal audit function, as the third line of defence, conducts risk-based and
general audits and reviews the internal governance arrangements, processes and
mechanisms to ascertain that they are sound and effective, implemented and consistently
applied. The internal audit func tion is also in charge of the independent review o f the first
two lines of defence , including other internal functions, units and business lines. The internal
audit function performs its tasks fully independently of the other lines of defence .
35. To ensure their proper functioning, all internal control functions need to be independent of
the business they control, have the appropriate financial and human resources to perform
their tasks, and report directly to the management body. Within all three lines of defence,
appropriate internal control procedures, mechanisms and processes should be designed,
developed, maintained and evaluated under the ultimate responsibility of the management
body.
36. All elements within the guidelines are subject to the principle of proportionality, meaning that
they are to be applied in a manner that is appropriate, taking into account in particular the
institution’s size, internal organisation and nature, and the complexity of its activities.
37. The guidelines specify further the requirements under Directive 2013/36/EU that need to be
considered when setting up new structures, e.g. in third countries, including also offshore
financial centres, and which aim to increase the transparency of and reduce the risks
connected with such activities. Guidelines are also provided regarding the reporting of
institutions on governance arrangements, including in relation to such structures.
38. The guidelines aim to establish a sound risk culture in institutions. Risks should be taken within
a well-defined framework in line with the institution’s risk strategy and risk appetite. This
includes the establishment of and ensuring compliance with a system of limits and controls.
Risks within new products and business areas, but also risks that may result from changes to
institutions’ products, processes and systems , are to be duly identified, assessed,
appropriately managed and monitored. The r isk management function and compliance
function should be involved in the establishment of the framework and the approval of such
changes to ensure that all material risks are taken into account and that the institution
complies with all internal and external requirements.
39. To ensure objective decision-making, oversight and compliance with external and internal
requirements, including institutions’ strategies and risk limits, institutions should implement
a conflict-of-interest policy and internal whistleblowing procedures.
40. In order to prevent conflicts of interest, the management body should ensure that a
framework for the identification and, where necessary, mitigation of conflicts of interests
exist. The institution, its organisational substructures, staff and shareholders hold different
interests that should be considered in such a framework in order to ensure that decisions are
taken objectively. Examples of typical sources of conflicts of interests are diverging economic

[Page 12]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
5
interests of different parties involved or close links between decision-makers and contractual
parties.
41. The management body has the highest decision -making powers , consequently the
identification and management of conflicts of interest of members of the management body
and parties closely related to the members of the management body is a cornerstone of sound
internal governance practices . Therefore, the guidelines specify measures that should be
implemented by institutions to prudently manage conflicts of interests that may arise from
granting loans to and entering into other transactions with members of the management
body and their related parties.

[Page 13]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
12
EBA/GL/2021/05
2 July 2021
Guidelines
on internal governance

[Page 14]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
13
1. Compliance and reporting
obligations
Status of these guidelines
1. These guidelines are issued pursuant to Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/20107. In
accordance with Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent authorities and
financial institutions, including institutions, must make every effort to comply with the
guidelines.
2. Guidelines set the EBA view of appropriate supervisory practices within the European System
of Financial Supervision or of how Union law should be applied in a particular area. Competent
authority as defined in Article 4(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 to whom guidelines apply
should comply by incorporating them into their practices as appropriate (e.g. by amending
their legal framework or their supervisory processes), including where guidelines are directed
primarily at institutions.
Reporting requirements
3. According to Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent authority must notify
the EBA as to whether they comply or intend to comply with these guidelines, or otherwise
with reasons for non-compliance, by ([dd.mm.yyyy]). In the absence of any notification by this
deadline, competent authority will be considered by the EBA to be non -compliant.
Notifications should be sent by submitting the form av ailable on the EBA website to
compliance@eba.europa.eu with the reference ‘EBA/GL/ 2021/05’. Notifications should be
submitted by persons with appropriate authority to report compliance on behalf of their
competent authority. Any change in the status of compliance must also be reported to EBA.
4. Notifications will be published on the EBA website, in line with Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU)
No 1093/2010.
7 Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealin g
Commission Decision 2009/78/EC (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p. 12).

[Page 15]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
14
2. Subject matter, scope and definitions
Subject matter
5. These guidelines specify further the internal governance arrangements , processes and
mechanisms that institutions, that are subject to Directive 2013/36/EU8 and investment firms
that are subject to Title VII of Directive 2013/36/EU in application of Article 1(2) and (5) of
Regulation 2019/2033/EU, should implement in accordance with Article 74(1) of
Directive 2013/36/EU to ensure their effective and prudent management.
Addressees
These guidelines are addressed to competent authorities as defined in point (i) of Article 4 2)
of Regulation (EU) 1093/2010, and to financial institutions as defined in Article 4(1) of
Regulation (EU) 1093/2010 that are either institutions for the purposes of the application of
Directive 2013/36/EU as defined in point 3 of Article 3(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU also having
regard to Article 3 (3) of that Directive or investment firms subject to Title VII of
Directive 2013/36/EU in application of Article 1(2) and (5) of Regu lation 2019/2033/EU
(‘institutions’).
Scope of application
6. These guidelines apply in relation to institutions’ governance arrangements, including their
organisational structure and the corresponding lines of responsibility, processes to identify,
manage, monitor and report all risks9 they are or might be exposed to , and internal control
framework.
7. The guidelines intend to embrace all existing board structures and do not advocate any
particular structure. The guidelines do not interfere with the general allocation of competences
in accordance with national company law. Accordingly, they should be applied irrespective of
the board structure used (unitary and/or a dual board structure and/or another structure)
across Member States. The management body, as defined in Points (7) and (8) of Article 3(1) of
Directive 2013/36/EU, should be understood as havi ng management (executive) and
supervisory (non-executive) functions10.
8. The terms ‘management body in its management function’ and ‘management body in its
supervisory function’ are used throughout these guidelines without referring to any specific
8 Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit
institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms, amending Directive 2002/87/EC
and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176, 27.6.2013, p. 338).
9 Any reference to risks in these guidelines should include money laundering and terrorist financing risks.
10 See also recital 56 of Directive 2013/36/EU.

[Page 16]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
15
governance structure, and references to the management (executive) or supervisory (non -
executive) function should be understood as applying to the bodies or members of the
management body responsible for that function in accordance with national law. When
implementing these guidelines, competent authorities should take into account their national
company law and specify, where necessary, to which body or members of the management
body those functions should apply.
9. In Member States where the management body delegates, partially or fully, the executive
functions to a person or an internal executive body (e.g. a chief executive officer ( CEO),
management team or executive committee), the persons who perform those executive
functions on the basis of that delegation should be understood as constituting the management
function of the management body. For the purposes of these guidelines, any reference to the
management body in its management function should be understood as including also the
members of the executive body or the CEO, as defined in these guidelines, even if they have not
been proposed or appointed as formal members of the institution’s governing body or bodies
under national law.
10. In Member States where some responsibilities are directly exercised by shareholders, members
or owners of the institution instead of the management body, institutions should ensure that
such responsibilities and related decisions are in line, as far as possible, with the guidelines
applicable to the management body.
11. The definitions of CEO , chief financial officer (CFO) and key function holder used in these
guidelines are purely functional and are not intend ed to impose the appointment of those
officers or the creation of such positions unless prescribed by relevant EU or national law.
12. Institutions should comply and competent authorities should ensure that institutions comply
with these guidelines on an individual, sub-consolidated and consolidated basis, in accordance
with the level of application set out in Article 109 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
Definitions
13. Unless otherwise specified, terms used and defined in Directive 2013/36/EU and Regulation
(EU) No 575/2013 have the same meaning in the guidelines. In addition, for the purposes of
these guidelines, the following definitions apply:
Risk appetite
means the aggregate level and types of risk an institution is willing
to assume within its risk capacity, in line with its business model,
to achieve its strategic objectives.
Risk capacity means the maximum level of risk an institution is able to assume
given its capital base, its risk management and control capabilities,
and its regulatory constraints.

[Page 17]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
16
Risk culture means an institution’s norms, attitudes and behaviours related to
risk awareness, risk-taking and risk management, and the controls
that shape decisions on risks. Risk culture influences the decisions
of management and employees during the day -to-day activities
and has an impact on the risks they assume.
Staff means all employees of an institution and its subsidiaries within
its scope of consolidation, including subsidiaries not subject to
Directive 2013/36/EU, and all members of the management
body in its management function and in its supervisory function.
Chief executive officer (CEO) means the person who is responsible for managing and steer ing
the overall business activities of an institution.
Chief financial officer (CFO) means the person who is overall responsible for managing all of
the following activities: financial resources management, financial
planning and financial reporting.
Heads of internal control
functions
means the persons at the highest hierarchical level in charge of
effectively managing the day-to-day operation of the independent
risk management, compliance and internal audit functions.
Key function holders means persons who have significant influence over the direction
of the institution but who are neither members of the
management body , nor the CEO. They include the heads of
internal control functions and the CFO, where they are not
members of the management body, and, where identified on a
risk-based approach by institutions, other key function holders.
Other key function holders might include heads of significant
business lines, European E conomic Area/European Free Trade
Association branches, third country subsidiaries and other internal
functions.
Prudential consolidation
means the application of the prudential rules set out in Directive
2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on a consolidated
or sub -consolidated basis, in accordance with Part 1, Title 2,
Chapter 2 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.11
Gender pay gap means the difference between the average gross hourly earnings
of men and women expressed as a percentage of the average gross
hourly earnings of men.
Consolidating institution means an institution that is required to abide by the prudential
requirements on the basis of the consolidated situation in
accordance with Part 1, Title 2, Chapter 2 of Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013.
11 See also RTS on prudential consolidation under:
https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/ files/document_library/Publications/Draft%20Technical%20Stan
dards/2021/973355/Final%20Report%20Draft%20RTS%20methods%20of%20consolidation.pdf

[Page 18]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
17
Significant institutions means institutions referred to in Article 131 of
Directive 2013/36/EU (global systemically important institutions
(G-SIIs) and other systemically important institutions (O-SIIs)), and,
as appropriate, other institutions determined by the competent
authority or national law , based on an assessment of the
institutions’ size and internal organisation, and the nature, scope
and complexity of their activities.
Listed institution means institutions whose financial instruments are admitted to
trading on a regulated market or on a multilateral trading facility
as defined under Article 4(21) and Article 4(22) of
Directive 2014/65/EU, in one or more Member States12.
Shareholder means a person who owns shares in an institution or, depending
on the legal form of an institution, other owners or members of
the institution.
Directorship means a position as a member of the management body of an
institution or another legal entity.
3. Implementation
Date of application
14. These updated guidelines apply from 31 December 2021.
Repeal
15. The EBA Guidelines on internal governance (EBA/GL/2017/11) of 26 September 2017 are
repealed with effect from 31 December 2021.
12 Directive 2014/65/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 on markets in financial
instruments and amending Directive 2002/92/EC and Directive 2011/61/EU (OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 349).

[Page 19]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
18
4. Guidelines
Title I – Proportionality
16. The proportionality principle encoded in Article 74(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU aims to ensure
that internal governance arrangements are consistent with the individual risk profile and
business model of the institution, so that the objectiv es of the regulatory requirements and
provisions are effectively achieved.
17. Institutions should take into account their size and internal organisation, and the nature, scale
and complexity of their activities , when developing and implementing internal gover nance
arrangements. Significant institutions should have more sophisticated governance
arrangements, while small and less complex institutions may implement simpler governance
arrangements. Institutions should however note that the size or systemic importa nce of an
institution may not, by itself, be indicative of the extent to which an institution is exposed to
risks.
18. For the purpose of the application of the principle of proportionality and in order to ensure an
appropriate implementation of the regulatory requirements and these guidelines , all the
following aspects should be taken into account by institutions and competent authorities:
a. the size in terms of the balance-sheet total of the institution and its subsidiaries within
the scope of prudential consolidation;
b. the geographical presence of the institution and the size of its operations in each
jurisdiction;
c. the legal form of the institution, including whether the institution is part of a group
and, if so, the proportionality assessment for the group;
d. whether it is a listed institution;
e. whether the institution is authorised to use internal models for the measurement of
capital requirements (e.g. the internal ratings-based approach);
f. the type of authorised activities and services performed by the institution (e.g. see also
Annex 1 to Directive 2013/36/EU and Annex 1 to Directive 2014/65/EU);
g. the underlying business model and strategy; the nature and complexity of the business
activities, and the institution’s organisational structure;

[Page 20]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
19
h. the risk strategy, risk appetite and actual risk profile of the institution, taking into
account also the result of the SREP capital and SREP liquidity assessments;
i. the ownership and funding structure of the institution;
j. the type of clients (e.g. retail, corporate, institutional, small businesses, public entities)
and the complexity of the products or contracts;
k. the outsourced functions and distribution channels;
l. the existing information technology (IT) systems, including continuity systems and
outsourcing functions in this area; and
m. whether the institution falls under the definition in Points 145 and 146 of Article 4(1)
of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of a small an d non -complex institution or a large
institution.
Title II – Role and composition of the management bo dy and
committees
1 Role and responsibilities of the management body
19. In accordance with Article 88(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU, the management body must have
ultimate and overall responsibility for the institution and defines, oversees and is accountable
for the implementation of the governance arrangements within the institution that ensure
effective and prudent management of the institution.
20. The duties of the management body should be clearly defined , distinguishing between the
duties of the management (executive) function and the supervisory (non-executive) function.
The respon sibilities and duties of the management body should be described in a written
document and duly approved by the management body. All members of the management body
should be fully aware of the structure and responsibilities of the management body, and of the
division of tasks between different functions of the management body and its committees.
21. The management body in its supervisory function and in its management function should
interact effectively. Both functions should provide each other with sufficient information to
allow them to perform their respective roles. In order to have appropriate checks and balances
in place, the decision-making within the management body should not be dominated by a single
member or a small subset of its members.
22. The management body’s responsibilities should include setting, approving and overseeing the
implementation of:

[Page 21]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
20
a. the overall business strategy and the key policies of the institution within the
applicable legal and regulatory framework, taking into account the institution’s long-
term financial interests and solvency;
b. the overall risk strategy , the institution’s risk appetite and its risk management
framework and measures to ensure that the management body devotes sufficient time
to risk and risk management issues;
c. an adequate and effective internal governance and internal control framework , as
defined in Title V, that:
i. includes a clear organisational structure and well-functioning independent
internal risk management, compliance and audit function s that have
sufficient authority, stature and resources to perform their functions;
ii. ensures compliance with applicable regulatory requirements in the context
of the prevention of money laundering and terrorism financing;
d. the amounts, types and distribution of both internal capital and regulatory capital to
adequately cover the risks of the institution;
e. targets for the liquidity management of the institution;
f. a remuneration policy that is in line with the remuneration principles set out in
Articles 92 to 95 of Directive 2013/36/EU and the EBA guidelines on sound
remuneration policies under Articles 74(3) and 75(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU13;
g. arrangements aimed at ensuring that the individual and collective suitability
assessments of the management body are carried out effectively, that the composition
and succession planning of the management body are appropriate, and that the
management body performs its functions effectively14;
h. a selection and suitability assessment process for key function holders15;
i. arrangements aimed at ensuring the internal functioning of each committee of the
management body, when established, detailing the:
i. role, composition and tasks of each of them;
13 EBA guidelines on sound remuneration policies
14 See also the joint ESMA and EBA guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body
and key function holders.
15 See also joint ESMA and EBA guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body and
key function holders.

[Page 22]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
21
ii. appropriate infor mation flow, including the documentation of
recommendations and conclusions, and reporting lines between each
committee and the management body , competent authorities and other
parties;
j. a risk culture in line with Section 9 of these guidelines, which addresses the institution’s
risk awareness and risk-taking behaviour;
k. a corporate culture and values in line with Section 10, which foster responsible and
ethical behaviour, including a code of conduct or similar instrument;
l. a conflict-of-interest policy at institutional level in line with Section 11 and for staff in
line with Section 12; and
m. arrangements aimed at ensuring the integrity of the accounting and financial reporting
systems, including financial and operational controls and compliance with the law and
relevant standards.
23. When setting, approving and overseeing the implementation of the aspects listed in
Paragraph 22 the management body should aim at ensuring a business model , governance
arrangements, including a risk management framework that take into account all risks. When
taking into account all risks, institutions are exposed to, institutions should take into account
all relevant risk factors, including environmental, social and governance risk factors. Institutions
should consider that the latter may drive their prudential risks, including credit risks, e.g. via
risk factors related to t he transition to a susta inable economy or external physical climate-
related events that may affect debtors, market, liquidity, operational risks and also reputational
risks, e.g. via social and governance risk factors, e.g. in the context of outsourcing
arrangements16. Such risks include, e.g. legal risks in the area of contractual or labour law, risks
related to potential human rights violations or other ESG risk factors that may affect the country
where a service provider is located and its ability to provide the agreed service levels.
24. The management body must oversee the process of disclosure and communications with
external stakeholders and competent authorities.
25. All members of the management body should be informed about the overall activity, financial
and risk situation of the institution, taking into account the economic environment, and about
decisions taken that have a major impact on the institution’s business.
26. A member of the management body may be responsible for an internal control function as
referred to in Title V, Section 19.1, provided that the member does not have other mandates
16 See EBA report on ESG risk management and supervision published under the CRD Art. 98(8) for a description of EBA’s
understanding of ESG risks, transmission channels, and recommendations for arrangements, processes, mechanisms an d
strategies to be implemented by institutions to identify, assess and manage ESG risks.

[Page 23]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
22
that would compromise the member’s internal control activities and the independence of the
internal control function.
27. The management body should monitor , periodically review and address any weaknesses
identified regarding the implementation of processes, strategies and policies related to the
responsibilities listed in Paragraphs 22 and 23. The internal governance frame work and its
implementation should be reviewed and updated on a periodic basis taking into account the
proportionality principle, as further explained in Title I. A deeper review should be carried out
where material changes affect the institution.
2 Management function of the management body
28. The management body in its management function should engage actively in the business of
an institution and should take decisions on a sound and well-informed basis.
29. The management body in its management function should be responsible for the
implementation of the strategies set by the management body and discuss regularly the
implementation and appropriat eness of those strategies with the management body in its
supervisory function. The operational implementation may be performed by the institution’s
management.
30. The management body in its management function sh ould constructively challenge and
critically review propositions, explanations and information received when exercising its
judgement and taking decisions. The management body in its management function should
comprehensively report, and inform regularly and where necessary without undue delay the
management body in its supervisory function of the relevant elements for the assessment of a
situation, the risks and developments affecting or that may affect the institution, e.g. material
decisions on business activities and risks taken, the evaluation of the institution’s economic and
business environment, liquidity and sound capital base , and assessment of its material risk
exposures.
31. Without prejudice to the national transposition of Directive 2015/849/EU, the management
body should identify one of its members in line with the requirements under Article 46(4) of
Directive 2015/849/EU Anti-Money Laundering Directive ( AMLD) who is responsible for the
implementation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions necessary to comply
with t his directive, including the corresponding AML/CFT policies and procedures in the
institution and at the level of the management body17.
3 Supervisory function of the management body
32. The role of the members of the management body in its supervisory function should include
monitoring and constructively challenging the strategy of the institution.
17The management body as a collegial body remains responsible as a whole.

[Page 24]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
23
33. Without prejudice to national law the management body in its supervisory function should
include independent members as pr ovided for in Section 9.3 of the joint ESMA and EBA
guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body and key
function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU.
34. Without prejudice to the responsibilities assigned under the applicable national company law,
the management body in its supervisory function should:
a. oversee and monitor management decision-making and actions and provide effective
oversight of the management body in its management function, including monitoring
and scrutinising its individual and collective performance and the implementation of
the institution’s strategy and objectives;
b. constructively challenge and critically review proposals and information provided by
members of the management body in its management function, as well as its decisions;
c. taking into account the proportionality principle as set out in Title I, appropriately fulfil
the duties and role of the risk committ ee, the remuneration committee and the
nomination committee, where no such committees have been set up;
d. ensure and periodically assess the effectiveness of the institution’s internal
governance framework and take appropriate steps to address any identified
deficiencies;
e. oversee and monitor that the institution’s strategic objectives, organisational structure
and risk strategy, its risk appetite and risk management framework , as well as other
policies (e.g. remuneration policy) and the disclosure framework are implemented
consistently;
f. monitor that the risk culture of the institution is implemented consistently;
g. oversee the implementation and maintenance of a code of conduct or similar code and
effective policies to identify, manage and mitigate actual and potential conflicts of
interest;
h. oversee the integrity of financial information and reporting, and the internal control
framework, including an effective and sound risk management framework;
i. ensure that the heads of internal control functions are able to act independently and,
regardless the responsibility to report to other internal bodies, business lines or units,
can raise concerns and warn the management body in its supervisory function directly,
where necessary, when adverse risk developments affect or may affect the institution;
and

[Page 25]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
24
j. monitor the implementation of the internal audit plan, after the prior involvement of
the risk and audit committees, where such committees are established.
4 Role of the chair of the management body
35. The chair of the management body should lead the management body , contribute to an
efficient flow of information within the management body and between the management body
and the committees thereof, where established, and should be responsible for its effective
overall functioning.
36. The chair should encourage and promote open and critical discussion and ensure that
dissenting views can be expressed and discussed within the decision-making process.
37. As a general principle, the chair of the management body should be a non-executive member.
Where the chair is permitted to assume executive duties, the institution should have measures
in place to mitigate any adverse impact on the institution’s checks and balances (e.g. by
designating a lead board member or a senior independent board member, or by having a larger
number of non-executive members within the management body in its supervisory function).
In particular, in accordance with Article 88(1)(e) of Directive 2013/36/EU, the chair of the
management body in its supervisory function of an institution must not exercise simultaneously
the functions of a CEO within the same institution, unless justified by the institution and
authorised by competent authorities.
38. The chair should set meeting agenda s and ensure tha t strategic issues are discussed with
priority. He or she should ensure that decisions of the management body are taken on a sound
and well-informed basis and that documents and information are received in enough time
before the meeting.
39. The chair of the management body should contribute to a clear allocation of duties between
members of the management body and the existence of an efficient flow of information
between them, in order to allow the members of the management body in its supervisory
function to constructively contribute to discussions and to cast their votes on a sound and well-
informed basis.
5 Committees of the management body in its supervisory function
5.1 Setting up committees
40. In accordance with Article 109(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU in conjunction with Articles 76(3),
88(2), and 95(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU, all institutions that are themselves significant,
considering the individual , sub-consolidated and consolidated levels, must establish risk,

[Page 26]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
25
nomination 18 and remuneration 19 committees to advise the management body in its
supervisory function and to prepare the decisions to be taken by this body. Non-significant
institutions, including when they are within the scope of prudential consolidation of an
institution that is significant in a sub-consolidated or consolidated situation, are not obliged to
establish those committees.
41. Where no risk or nomination committee is established, the references in these guidelines to
those committees should be construed as applying to the management body in its supervisory
function, taking into account the principle of proportionality as set out in Title I.
42. Institutions may, taking into account the criteria set out in Title I of these guidelines, establish
other committees (e.g. anti-money laundering/counter terrorist financing (AML/CTF), ethics,
conduct and compliance committees).
43. Institutions should ensure a clear allocation and distribution of duties and tasks between
specialised committees of the management body.
44. Each committee should have a documented mandate, including the scope of its responsibilities,
from the management body in its supe rvisory function and establish appropriate working
procedures.
45. Committees should support the supervisory function in specific areas and facilitate the
development and implementation of a sound internal governance framework. Delegating to
committees does not in any way release the management body in its supervisory function from
collectively fulfilling its duties and responsibilities.
5.2 Composition of committees20
46. All committees should be chaired by a non-executive member of the management body who is
able to exercise objective judgement.
47. Independent members21 of the management body in its supervisory function should be actively
involved in committees.
48. Where committees have to be set up in accordance with Directive 2013/36/EU or national law,
they should be composed of at least three members.
18 See also the joint ESMA and EBA guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body
and key function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU.
19 With regard to the remuneration committee, please refer to the EBA guidelines on sound remuneration practices.
20 This section should be read in conjunction with the joint ESMA and EBA guidelines on the assessment of the suitability
of members of the management body and key function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU.
21 As defined in Section 9.3 of the joint ESMA and EBA guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the
management body and key function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU.

[Page 27]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
26
49. Institutions should ensure, taking into account the size of the management body and the
number of independent members of the management body in its supervisory fu nction, that
committees are not composed of the same group of members that forms another committee.
50. Institutions should consider the occasional rotation of chairs and members of committees ,
taking into account the specific experience, knowledge and skills that are individually or
collectively required for those committees.
51. The risk and nomination committees should be composed of non-executive members of the
management body in its supervisory function of the institution concerned. The audit committee
should be composed in accordance with Article 41 of Directive 2006/43/EC 22 . The
remuneration committee should be composed in accordance with Section 2.4.1 of the EBA
guidelines on sound remuneration policies23.
52. In G-SIIs and O-SIIs, the nomination committee should include a majority of members who are
independent and be chaired by an independent member . In other significant institutions,
determined by competent authorities or national law, the nomination committee should
include a suf ficient number of members who are independent ; such institutions may also
consider as a good practice having a chair of the nomination committee who is independent.
53. Members of the nomination committee should have, individually and collectively, appropriate
knowledge, skills and expertise concerning the selection process and suitability requirements
as set out under Directive 2013/36/EU.
54. In G-SIIs and O-SIIs, the risk committee should include a majority of members who are
independent. In G-SIIs and O-SIIs the chair of the risk committee should be an independent
member. In other significant institutions, determined by competent authorities or national law,
the risk committee should include a sufficient number of members who are independent and
the risk committee s hould be chaired , where possible , by an independent member. In all
institutions, the chair of the risk committee should be neither the chair of the management
body nor the chair of any other committee.
55. Members of the risk committee should have , individually and collectively , appropriate
knowledge, skills and expertise concerning risk management and control practices.
5.3 Committees’ processes
56. Committees should regularly report to the management body in its supervisory function.
22 Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on statutory audits of annual
accounts and consolidated accounts, amending Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC and repealing Council
Directive 84/253/EEC (OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 87) as last amended by Directive 2014/56/EU of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 16 April 2014.
23 EBA guidelines on sound remuneration policies under Articles 74(3) and 75(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU and disclosures
under Article 450 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (EBA/GL/2015/22).

[Page 28]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
27
57. Committees should interact with each other as appropriate. Without prejudice to
Paragraph 49, such interaction could take the form of cross-participation so that the chair or a
member of a committee may also be a member of another committee.
58. Members of committees should engage in open and critical discussions, during which
dissenting views are discussed in a constructive manner.
59. Committees should document the agendas of committee meetings and their main results and
conclusions.
60. The risk and nomination committees should at least:
a. have access to all relevant information and data necessary to perform th eir role,
including information and data from relevant corporate and control functions (e.g.
legal, finance , human resources , IT, internal audit, risk, compliance , including
information on AML/CTF compliance and aggregated information on suspicious
transaction reports, and ML/TF risk factors);
b. receive regular reports, ad hoc information, communications and opinions from heads
of internal control functions concerning the current risk profile of the institution, its
risk culture and its risk limits, as well as on any material breaches24, that may have
occurred, with detailed information on and recommendations for corrective measures
taken, to be taken or suggested to address them; periodically review and decide on
the content, format and frequency of the information on risk to be reported to them;
and
c. where necessary, ensure the proper involvement of the internal control functions and
other relevant functions (human resources, legal, finance) within the ir respective
areas of expertise and/or seek external expert advice.
5.4 Role of the risk committee
61. Where established, the risk committee should at least:
a. advise and support the management body in its supervisory function regarding the
monitoring of the institution’s overall actual and future risk strategy and risk appetite,
taking into account all types of risks, to ensure that they are in line with the business
strategy, objectives, corporate culture and values of the institution;
b. assist the management body in its supervisory function in oversee ing the
implementation of the institution’s risk strategy and the corresponding limits set;
24 With regard to serious breaches in the area of AML/TF. Please refer also to the Guidelines to be issued under
Article 117(6) of Directive 2013/36/EU, specifying the manner of cooperation and information exchange between the
authorities referred to in Paragraph 5 of this article, particularly in relation to cross-border groups and in the context o f
identifying serious breaches of anti-money laundering rules.

[Page 29]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
28
c. oversee the implementation of the strategies for capital and liquidity management as
well as for all other relevant risks of an institution, such as market, credit, operational
(including legal and IT risks), and reputational risks, in order to assess their adequacy
against the approved risk strategy and risk appetite;
d. provide the management body in its supervisory function with recommendations on
necessary adjustments to the risk strategy resulting from , inter alia, changes in the
business model of the institution, market developments or recommendations made
by the risk management function;
e. provide advice on the appointment of external consultants that the supervisory
function may decide to engage for advice or support;
f. review a number of possible scenarios, including stressed scenarios, to assess how the
institution’s risk profile would react to external and internal events;
g. oversee the alignment between all material financial products and services offered to
clients and the business model and risk strategy of the institution25. The risk committee
should assess the risks associated with the offered financial products and services and
take into account the alignment between the prices assigned to and the profits gained
from those products and services; and
h. assess the recommendations of internal or external auditors and f ollow up on the
appropriate implementation of measures taken.
62. The risk committee should collaborate with other committees whose activities may have an
impact on the risk strategy (e.g. audit and remuneration committees) and regularly
communicate with the institution’s internal control functions , in particular the risk
management function.
63. When established, the risk committee must, without prejudice to the tasks of the remuneration
committee, examine whether incentives provided by the remuneration policies and practices
take into consideration the institution’s risk, capital and liquidity and the likelihood and timing
of earnings.
5.5 Role of the audit committee
64. In accordance with Directive 2006/43/EC26, where established, the audit committee should,
inter alia:
25 See also the EBA guidelines on product oversight and governance arrangements for retail banking products, availab le
at http://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/consumer-protection-and-financial-innovation/guidelines-on-
product-oversight-and-governance-arrangements-for-retail-banking-products.
26 Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 17 May 2006 on statutory audits of annual
accounts and consolidated accounts, amending Council Directives 78/660/EEC and 83/349/EEC and repealing Council
Directive 84/253/EEC (OJ L 157, 9.6.2006, p. 87), as last amended by Directive 2014/56/EU of the European Parliament
and of the Council of 16 April 2014.

[Page 30]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
29
a. monitor the effectiveness of the institution’s internal quality control and risk
management systems and, where applicable, its internal audit function, with regard to
the financial reporting of the audited institution, without breaching its independence;
b. oversee the establishment of accounting policies by the institution;
c. monitor the financial reporting process and submit recommendations aimed at
ensuring its integrity;
d. review and monitor the independence of the statutory auditors or the audit firms in
accordance with Articles 22, 22a, 22b, 24a and 24b of Directive 2006/43/EU and
Article 6 of Regulation (EU) No 537/201427, and in particular the appropriateness of
the pro vision of non -audit services to the audited institution in accordance with
Article 5 of that regulation;
e. monitor the statutory audit of the annual and consolidated financial statements , in
particular its performance, taking into account any findings and co nclusions by the
competent authority pursuant to Article 26(6) of Regulation (EU) No 537/2014;
f. be responsible for the procedure for the selection of external statutory auditor(s) or
audit firm(s) and recommend for approval by the institution’s competent body their
appointment (in accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 537/2014 except
when Article 16(8) of Regulation (EU) No 537/2014 is app lied), compensation and
dismissal;
g. review the audit scope and frequency of the statutory audit of annual or consolidated
accounts;
h. in accordance with Article 39(6)(a) of Directive 2006/43/EU, inform the administrative
or supervisory body of the audited entity of the outcome of the statutory audit and
explain how the statutory audit contributed to the integrity of financial reporting and
what the role of the audit committee was in that process; and
i. receive and take into account audit reports.
5.6 Combined committees
65. In accordance with Article 76(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may allow
institutions that are not considered sig nificant to combine the risk committee with, where
established, the audit committee as referred to in Article 39 of Directive 2006/43/EC.
27 Regulation (EU) No 537/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on specific requirements
regarding statutory audit of public -interest entities and repealing Commission Decision 2005/909/EC (OJ L 158,
27.5.2014, p. 77).

[Page 31]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
30
66. Where risk and nomination committees are established in non-significant institutions, they may
combine the committees. If they do so, those institutions should document the reasons why
they have chosen to combine the committees and how the approach achieves the objectives
of the committees.
67. Institutions should at all times ensure that the members of a combined committee possess ,
individually and collectively, the necessary knowledge, skills and expertise to fully understand
the duties to be performed by the combined committee28.
Title III – Governance framework
6 Organisational framework and structure
6.1 Organisational framework
68. The management body of an institution should ensure a suitable and transparent
organisational and operational structure for that institution and should have a written
description of it. The structure sh ould promote and demonstrate the effective and prudent
management of an institution at individual, sub-consolidated and consolidated levels. The
management body should ensure that the internal control functions are independent of the
business lines they control, including that there is an adequate segregation of duties, and that
they have the appropriate financial and human resources as well as powers to effectively
perform their role. The reporting lines and the allocation of responsibilities, in particular among
key function holders, within an institution should be clear, well-defined, coherent, enforceable
and duly documented. The documentation should be updated as appropriate.
69. The structure of the institution should not impede the ability of the management body to
oversee and manage effectively the risks the institution or the group faces or the ability of the
competent authority to effectively supervise the institution.
70. The management body should assess whether and how material changes to the group ’s
structure (e.g. setting up of new subsidiaries, mergers and acquisitions, selling or winding-up
parts of the group, or external developments) impact the soundness of the institution’s
organisational framework. Where weaknesses are identified, the management body should
make any necessary adjustments swiftly.
6.2 Know your structure
71. The management body should full y know and understand the legal, organisational and
operational structure of the institution (‘know your structure’) and ensure that it is in line with
its approved business and risk strategy and risk appetite and covered by its risk management
framework.
28 See also the joint ESMA and EBA guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the managemen t body
and key function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU.

[Page 32]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
31
72. The management body should be responsible for the approval of sound strategies and policies
for the establishment of new structures. Where an institution creates many legal entities within
its group, their number and, in particular, the interconnections and transactions between them
should not pose challenges for the design of its internal governance, and for the effective
management and oversight of the risks of the group as a whole. The management body should
ensure that the structure of an institution and, where applicable, the structures within a group,
taking into account the criteria specified in Section 7, are clear, efficient and transparent to the
institution’s staff, shareholders and other stakeholders and to the competent authority.
73. The management body should guide the institution’s structure, its evolution and its limitations
and should ensure that the structure is justified and efficient and does not involve undue or
inappropriate complexity.
74. The management body of a consolidating institution should understand not only the legal,
organisational and operational structure of the group but also the purpose and activities of its
different entities and the links and relationships among them. This includes understandin g
group-specific operational risks and intra-group exposures as well as how the group's funding,
capital, liquidity and risk profiles could be affected under normal and adverse circumstances.
The management body should ensure that the institution is able to produce information on the
group in a timely manner, regarding the type, the characteristics, the organisational chart, the
ownership structure and the businesses of each legal entity, and that the institutions within the
group comply with all supervisory reporting requirements on an individual, sub-consolidated
and consolidated basis.
75. The management body of a consolidating institution should ensure that the different group
entities (including the consolidating institution itself) receive enough information to get a clear
perception of the general objectives, strategies and risk profile of the group and how the group
entity concerned is embedded in the group’s structure and operational functioning . Such
information and revisions thereof should be documented and made available to the relevant
functions concerned, including the management body , business lines and internal control
functions. The members of the management body of a consolidating institution should keep
themselve s informed about the risks the group’s structure causes , taking into account the
criteria specified in Section 7 of the guidelines. This includes receiving:
a. information on major risk drivers;
b. regular reports assessing the institution’s overall structure and evaluating the
compliance of individual entities’ activities with the approved group-wide strategy;
and
c. regular reports on topics where the regulatory framework requires compliance at
individual, sub-consolidated and consolidated levels.

[Page 33]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
32
6.3 Complex structures and non-standard or non-transparent
activities
76. Institutions should avoid setting up complex and potentially non-transparent structures.
Institutions should take into account in their decision-making the results of a risk assessment
performed to identify whether such structures could be used for a purpose connected with
money laundering, terrorist financing or other financial crimes and the respective controls and
legal framework in place29. To this end, institutions should take into account at least:
a. the extent to which the jurisdiction in which the structure will be set up complies
effectively with EU and international standards on tax transparency , anti-money
laundering and countering the financing of terrorism30;
b. the extent to which the structure serves an obvious economic and lawful purpose;
c. the extent to which the structure could be used to hide the identity of the ultimate
beneficial owner;
d. the extent to which the customer’s request that leads to the possible setting up of a
structure gives rise to concern;
e. whether the structure might impede appropriate oversight by the institution’s
management body or the institution’s ability to manage the related risk; and
f. whether the structure poses obstacles to effective supervision by competent
authorities.
77. In any case, institutions should not set up opaque or unnecessarily complex structures which
have no clear economic rationale or legal purpose or structures that could raise concerns that
these might be created for a purpose connected with financial crime.
78. When setting up such structures, the management body should understand them and their
purpose and the particular risks associated with them and ensure that the internal control
functions are appropriately involved. Such structures should be approved and maintained only
when their purpose has been clearly defined and understood, and when the management body
is satisfied that all material risks, including reputational risks, have been identified, that all risks
can be managed effectively and appropriately reported, and that effective oversight has been
ensured. The more complex and opaque the organisational and operational structure, and the
greater the risks, the more intensive the oversight of the structure should be.
29 For further details on the assessment of country risk and the risk associated with individual products and customers,
institutions should refer also to the joint guidelines on ML/TF risk factors (EBA GL JC/2017/37) currently under review.
30 See also: https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/anti-money-laundering-and-e-money/rts-on-the-
implementation-of-group-wide-aml/cft -policies-in-third-countries

[Page 34]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
33
79. Institutions should document their decisions and be able to justify their decisions to competent
authorities.
80. The management body should ensure that appropriate actions are taken to avoid or mitigate
the risks of activities within such structures. This includes ensuring that:
a. the institution has in place adequate policies and procedures and document ed
processes (e.g. applicable limits, information flows) for the consideration, compliance,
approval and risk management of such activities, taking into account the
consequences for the group’s organisational and operational structure, its risk profile
and its reputational risk;
b. information concerning these activities and the risks thereof is accessible to the
consolidating institution and internal and external auditors and is reported to the
management body in its supervisory function and to the competent authority that
granted authorisation; and
c. the institution periodically assesses the continuing need to maintain such structures.
81. These structures and activities, including their compliance with legislation and professional
standards, should be subject to regular review by the internal audit function following a risk-
based approach.
82. Institutions should take the same risk management measures as for the institution’s own
business activities when they perform non-standard or non-transparent activities for clients
(e.g. helping clients to set up vehicles in offshore jurisdictions, developing complex structures,
financing transactions for them or providing trustee services) that pose similar internal
governance challenges and create significant operational and reputational risks. In particular,
institutions should analyse the reason why a client wants to set up a particular structure.
7 Organisational framework in a group context
83. In accordance with Article 109(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU, parent undertakings and
subsidiaries subject to that directive should ensure that governance arrangements, processes
and mechanisms are consistent and well integrated on a consolidated or sub-consolidated
basis. To this end , parent undertaking s and s ubsidiaries within the scope of prudential
consolidation should implement such arrangements, proces ses and mechanism s in their
subsidiaries not subject to Directive 2013/36/EU, including those established in third countries,
including in offshore financial centres , to ensure robust governance arrangements on a
consolidated and sub -consolidated basis. With regard to remuneration requirements some
exceptions in line with Article 109 (4) and (5) apply 31 . Competent functions within the
consolidating institution and its subsidiaries should interact and exchange data and information
as appropriate. The governance arrangements, processes and mechanisms should ensure that
31 Please refer also to the EBA guidelines on sound remuneration policies

[Page 35]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
34
the consolidating institution has sufficient data and information and is able to assess the group-
wide risk profile, as detailed in Section 6.2.
84. The management body of a subsidiary that is subject to Directive 2013/36/EU should adopt and
implement on the individual level the group-wide governance policies established at the
consolidated or sub-consolidated level, in a manner that complies with all specific requirements
under EU and national law.
85. At the consolidated and sub-consolidated levels, the consolidating institution should ensure
adherence to the group-wide governance policies and internal control framework as referred
to in Title V by all institutions and other entities within the scope of prudential consolidation,
including their subsidiaries not themselves subject to Directive 2013/36/EU. When
implementing governance policies, the consolidating institution should ensure that robust
governance arrangements are in place for each subsidiary and consider specific arrangements,
processes and mechanisms where business activities are organised not in separate legal entities
but within a matrix of business lines that encompasses multiple legal entities.
86. A consolidating institution should consider the interests of all its subsidiaries, and how
strategies and policies contribute to the interest of each subsidiary and the interest of the group
as a whole over the long term.
87. Parent undertakings and their subsidiaries should ensure that the institutions and entities
within the group comply with all specific regulatory requirements in any relevant jurisdiction.
88. The consolidating institution should ensure that subsidiaries established in third countries, and
which are included in the scope of prudential consolidation, have governance arrangements,
processes and mechanisms in place that are consistent with group-wide governance policies
and comply with the requirements of Articles 74 to 96 of Directive 2013/36/EU and these
guidelines, as long as this is not unlawful under the laws of the third country.
89. The governance requirements of Directive 2013/36/EU and provisions in these guidelines apply
to institutions independent of the fact that they may be subsidiaries of a parent undertaking in
a third country. Where an EU subsidiary of a parent undertaking in a third country is a
consolidating institution, the scope of prudential consolidation does not include the level of the
parent undertaking located in a third country and other direct subsidiaries of that parent
undertaking. The consolidating institution should ensure that the group -wide governance
policy of th e parent institution in a third country is taken into consideration within its own
governance policy insofar as this is not contrary to the requirements set out under relevant EU
law, including Directive 2013/36/EU and the further specifications in these guidelines.
90. When establishing policies and documenting governance arrangements, institutions should
take into account the aspects listed in Annex I to the guidelines. While policies and
documentation may be inc luded in separate documents, institutions shoul d consider
combining them or referring to them in a single governance framework document.

[Page 36]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
35
8 Outsourcing policy 32
91. The management body should approve and regularly review and update the outsourcing policy
of an institution, ensuring that appropriate changes are implemented in a timely manner.
92. The outsourcing policy should consider the impact of outsourcing on an institution’s business
and the risks it faces (such as operational risks, including legal and IT risks; reputational risks;
and concentration risks). The policy should include the reporting and monitoring arrangements
to be implemented from inception to the end of an outsourcing agreement (including drawing
up the business case for outsourcing, entering into an outsourcing contract, the
implementation of the contract to its expiry, contingency plans and exit strategies). An
institution remains fully responsible for all outsourced services and activities and management
decisions arising from them. Accordingly, the outsourcing policy should make i t clear that
outsourcing does not relieve the institution of its regulatory obligations and its responsibilities
to its customers.
93. The policy should state that outsourcing arrangements should not hinder effective on-site or
off-site supervision of the institution and should not contravene any supervisory restrictions on
services and activities. The policy should also cover intragroup outsourcing (i.e. services
provided by a separate legal entity within an institution’s group) and take into account any
specific group circumstances.
Title IV – Risk culture and business conduct
9 Risk culture
94. A sound, diligent and consistent risk culture should be a key element of institutions’ effective
risk management and should enable institutions to make sound and informed decisions.
95. Institutions should develop an integrated and institution-wide risk culture, based on a full
understanding and holistic view of the risks they face and how they are managed, taking into
account the institution’s risk appetite.
96. Institutions should develop a risk culture through policies, communication and staff training
regarding the institutions’ activities, strategy and risk profile, and should adapt communication
and staff training to take into account staff’s responsibilities regarding risk-taking and risk
management.
97. Staff should be fully aware of their responsibilities relating to risk management. Risk
management should not be confined to risk specialists or internal control functions. Business
units, under the oversight of the management body, should be primarily responsible for
32 See also: EBA Guidelines on outsourcing arrangements available at: https://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-
policy/internal-governance/guidelines-on-outsourcing-arrangements

[Page 37]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
36
managing risks on a day -to-day basis in line with the institution’s policies, proce dures and
controls, taking into account the institution’s risk appetite and risk capacity.
98. A strong risk culture should include but is not necessarily limited to:
a. Tone from the to p: the management body should be responsible for setting and
communicating the institution’s core values and expectations . The behaviour of its
members should reflect the values. Institutions’ management, including key function
holders, should contribute to the internal communication of core values and
expectations to staff. Staff should act in accordance with all applicable laws and
regulations and promptly escalate observed non -compliance within or outside the
institution (e.g. to the competent authority through a whistleblowing process). The
management body should on an ongoing basis promote, monitor and assess the risk
culture of the institution; consider the impact of the risk culture on the financial
stability, risk profile and robu st governance of the institution; and make changes
where necessary.
b. Accountability: relevant staff at all levels should know and understand the core values
of the institution and, to the extent necessary for their role, its risk appetite and risk
capacity. They should be capable of performing their roles and be aware that they will
be held accountable for their actions in relation to the institution’s risk -taking
behaviour.
c. Effective communication and challenge: a sound risk culture should promote an
environment of open communication and effective challenge in which decision -
making processes encourage a broad range of views , allow for testing of current
practices, stimulate a constructive critical attitude among staff, and promote an
environment of open and constructive engagement throughout the entire
organisation.
d. Incentives: appropriate incentives should play a key role in aligning risk -taking
behaviour with the institution’s risk profile and its long-term interest33.
10 Corporate values and code of conduct
99. The management body should develop, adopt, adhere to and promote high ethical and
professional standards , taking into account the specific needs and characterist ics of the
institution, and should ensure the implementation of such standards ( through a code of
conduct or similar instrument). It should also oversee adherence to these standards by staff.
Where applicable, the management body may adopt and implement the institution’s group-
wide standards or common standards released by associations or other relevant organisations.
33 Please refer also to the EBA guidelines on sound remuneration policies unde r Articles 74(3) and 75(2) of
Directive 2013/36/EU and disclosures under Article 450 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (EBA/GL/2015/22), available at
https://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/remuneration.

[Page 38]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
37
100. Institutions should ensure that there is no discrimination of staff based on gender, race,
colour, ethnic or social origin, genetic features, language, religion or belief, political or any other
opinion, membership of a national minority, property, birth, disability, age or sexual
orientation.
101. Institution’s policies should be gend er neutral . This includes, but is not limited to
remuneration, recruitment policies, career development and succession plans, access to
training and ability to apply for internal vacancies. Institutions should ensure equal
opportunities 34 for all staff ind ependent of their genders, including with regard to career
perspectives and aim to improve the representation of the underrepresented gender in
positions within the management body as well as in the group of staff that have managerial
responsibilities as defined in the Commission’s Delegated Regulation (regulatory technical
standards ( RTS) on identified staff) . 35 Institutions should monitor the development of the
gender pay gap separately for identified staff (excluding members of the management body),
members of the management body in its management function, members of the management
body in the supervisory function and other staff. Institutions should have policies that facilitate
the reintegration of staff after maternity, paternity or parental leave.
102. The implemented standards should aim at enhancing the institution’s robust governance
arrangements and reducing the risks to which the institution is exposed, in particular
operational and reputational risks , which can have a considerable adverse impact on an
institution’s profitability and sustainability through fines, litigation costs, restrictions imposed
by competent authorities, other financial and criminal penalties, and the loss of brand value
and consumer confidence.
103. The management body should have clear and documented policies for how these standards
should be met. These policies should:
a. remind staff that all the institution’s activities should be conducted in compliance with
the applicable law and with the institution’s corporate values;
b. promote risk awareness thr ough a strong risk culture in line with Section 9 of the
guidelines, conveying the management body’s expectation that activities will not go
beyond the defined risk appetite and limits defined by the institution and the
respective responsibilities of staff;
c. set out principles on and provide examples of acceptable and unacceptable behaviours
linked in particular to financial misreporting and misconduct, economic and financial
crime including but not limited to fraud, money laundering and terrorist financing
(ML/TF), anti-trust practices, financial sanctions, bribery and corruption, market
manipulation, mis -selling and other violations of consumer protection laws , tax
34 See also Directive 2006/54/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 2006 on the implementation of
the principle of equal opportunities and equal treatment of men and women in matters of employment and occupation
35 See also EBA Guidelines on gender neutral remuneration policies

[Page 39]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
38
offences, whether committ ed directly or indirectly, including through unlawful or
banned dividend arbitrage schemes;
d. clarify that in addition to complying with legal and regulatory requirements and
internal policies, staff are expected to conduct themselves with honesty and integrity
and perform their duties with due skill, care and diligence; and
e. ensure that staff are aware of the potential internal and external disciplinary actions,
legal actions and sanctions that may follow misconduct and unacceptable behaviours.
104. Institutions should monitor compliance with such standards and ensure staff awareness,
e.g. by providing training. Institutions should define the function responsible for monitoring
compliance with and evaluating breaches of the code of conduct or similar instrument and a
process for dealing with issues of non-compliance. The results should periodically be reported
to the management body.
11 Conflict of interest policy at institutional level
105. The management body should be responsible for establishing, approving and overseeing
the implementation and maintenance of effective policies to identify, assess, manage and
mitigate or prevent actual and potential conflicts of interest at institutional level, e.g. as a result
of the various activities and roles of the institution, of different institutions within the scope of
prudential consolidation or of different business lines or units within an institution, or with
regard to external stakeholders.
106. Institutions should take , within their organisational and administrative arrangements ,
adequate measures to prevent conflicts of interest from adversely affecting the interests of its
clients.
107. Institutions’ measures to manage or , where appropriate, mitigate conflicts of interest
should be documented and include, inter alia:
a. an appropriate segregation of duties, e.g. entrusting conflicting activities within the
processing of transactions or when providing services to different persons , or
entrusting supervisory and reporting responsibilities for conflicting activities to
different persons;
b. establishing information barriers , e.g. through the physical separation of certain
business lines or units.

[Page 40]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
39
12 Conflict of interest policy for staff36
108. The management body should be responsible for establishing, approving and overseeing
the implementation and maintenance of effective policies to identify, assess, manage and
mitigate or prevent actual and potential conflicts between the interests of the institution and
the private interests of staff, including members of the management body, which could
adversely influence the performance of their duties and responsibilities. A consolidating
institution should consider interests within a group-wide conflict of interest policy on a
consolidated or sub-consolidated basis.
109. The policy should aim at identifying conflicts of interest of staff, including the interests of
their close st family members. Institutions should take into consideration that conflicts of
interest may arise not only from present but also from past personal or professional
relationships. Where conflicts of interest arise, institutions should assess their materiality and
decide on and implement mitigating measures, as appropriate.
110. Regarding conflicts of interest that may result from past relationships, institutions should
set an appropriate timeframe for which they want staff to report such conflicts of interest, on
the basis that these may still have an impact on staff’s behaviour and participation in decision-
making.
111. The policy should cover at least the following situations or relationships where conflicts of
interest may arise:
a. economic interests (e.g. shares , other ownership rights and memberships, financial
holdings and other economic interests in commercial customers, intellectual property
rights, loans granted by the institution to a company owned by staff, membership in a
body or ownership of a body or entity with conflicting interests);
b. personal or professional relationships with the owners of qualifying holdings in the
institution;
c. personal or professional relationships with staff of the institution or entities included
within the scope of prudential consolidation (e.g. family relationships);
d. other employment and previous employment within the recent past (e.g. five years);
e. personal or professional relationships with relevant external stakeholders (e.g. being
associated with material suppliers, consultancies or other service providers); and
f. political influence or political relationships.
36 This section should be read in conjunction with the joint ESMA and EBA guidelines on the assessment of the suitability
of members of the management body and key function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU.

[Page 41]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
40
112. Notwithstanding the above, institutions should take into consideration that being a
shareholder of an institution or having private accounts or loans with or using other services of
an institution should not lead to a situation where staff are considered to have a confli ct of
interest if they stay within an appropriate de minimis threshold.
113. The policy should set out the processes for reporting and communication to the function
responsible under the policy. Staff should have the duty to promptly disclose internally any
matter that may result, or has already resulted, in a conflict of interest.
114. The policy should differentiate between conflicts of interest that persist and need to be
managed permanently and conflicts of interest that occur unexpectedly with regard to a single
event (e.g. a transaction, the selection of service provider, etc.) and can usually be managed
with a one-off measure. In all circumstances, the interest of the institution should be central to
the decisions taken.
115. The policy should set out procedures, measures , documentation elements and
responsibilities for the identification and prevention of conflicts of interest, for the assessment
of their materiality and for taking mitigating measures . Such procedures , elements ,
responsibilities and measures should include:
a. entrusting conflicting activities or transactions to different persons;
b. preventing staff who are also active outside the institution from having inappropriate
influence within the institution regarding those other activities;
c. establishing the responsibility of the members of the management body to abstain
from voting on any matter where a member has or may have a conflict of interest or
where the member’s objectivity or ability to properly fulfil duties to the institution may
be otherwise compromised;
d. preventing members of the management body from holding directorships in
competing institutions, unless they are within institutions that belong to the same
institutional protection scheme , as referred to in Article 113(7) of Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013, credit institutions permanently affiliated to a central body, as referred
to in Article 10 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, or institutions within the scope of
prudential consolidation.
116. The policy should specifically cover the risk of conflicts of interest at the level of the
management body and provide sufficient guidance on the identification and management of
conflicts of interest that may impede the ability of members of the management body to take
objective and impartial decisions that aim to fulfil the best interests of the institution.

[Page 42]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
41
Institutions should take into consideration that conflicts of interest can have an impact on the
independence of mind of members of the management body37.
117. When mitigating identified conflicts of interests of members of the management body,
institutions should document the measures taken , including the reasoning on how those are
effective to ensure objective decision-making.
118. Actual or potential conflicts of interest that have been disclosed to the responsible function
within the institution should be appropriately assessed and managed. If a conflict of interest of
staff is identified, the institution should document the decision taken, in particular if the conflict
of interest and the related risks have been accepted , and if it has been accepted , how this
conflict of interest has been satisfactorily mitigated or remedied.
119. All actual and potential conflicts of interest at manage ment body level, individually and
collectively, should be adequately documented, communicated to the management body, and
discussed, decided on and duly managed by the management body.
12.1 Conflict of interest policy in the context of loans and other
transactions with members of the management body and
their related parties
120. As part of their conflicts of interest policies for staff (Section 12) and the management of
conflicts of interest of membe rs of the management body as set out in Paragraph 117, the
management body should set out a framework for identifying and managing conflicts of
interest in the context of granting loans and entering into other transactions (e.g. factoring,
leasing, property transactions, etc.) with members of the management body and their related
parties.
121. Without prejudice to the national transposition of Directive 2013/36/EU38, institutions may
consider additional categories of related parties to whom they apply, in whole or in part, their
conflicts of interest framework regarding loans and other transactions.
122. The conflicts of interest framework should ensure that decisions regarding the granting of
loans and entering into other transactions with members of the management body and their
related parties are taken objectively, without undue influence by conflicts of interests and are
as a general principle conducted at arm’s length.
123. The management body should set out the applicable decision-making processes for
granting loans to and entering into other transactions with members of the management body
and their related parties. This framework may provide for a differentiation between standard
37See also the joint ESMA and EBA guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body
and key function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU.
38 Please also refer to Basel Core Principle 20

[Page 43]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
42
business transactions 39 entered into in the ordinary course of business and concluded on
normal market te rms and staff loans and transactions, which are concluded on conditions
available to all staff . Furthermore, the conflicts of interest framework and decision-making
process may differentiate between material and non -material loans and other transactions,
different types of loans and other transactions and the level of actual or potential conflicts of
interest they may create.
124. As part of th e conflicts of interest framework, the management body should set
appropriate thresholds (e.g. per product type, or depending on the conditions) above which
the loan or other transaction with a member of the management body or its related parties
always requires the approval by the management body. Decisions on material loans or other
material transactions with members of the management body that are not being concluded
under normal market terms, but on conditions available to all staff, should always be made by
the management body.
125. The member of the management body benefitting from such a material loan or ot her
material transaction or the member who is related to the counterparty, should not be involved
in the decision-making.
126. When deciding on a loan or other transaction with a member of the management body or
their related parties, before taking a decision, institutions should assess the risk to which the
institution might be exposed due to the transaction.
127. Where loans are arranged as a line of credit (e.g. overdrafts), the initial decision and
amendments thereof should be documented. Any use of such agreed credit facilities within the
agreed limits should not be considered as a new decision on a loan to a member of the
management body or their related party. Where an amendment of a line of credit is material
in line with the institution’s policy, a new assessment and decision should be made.
128. To ensure compliance with their conflict of interest policies, institutions should ensure that
all relevant internal control pro cedures fully apply to loans and to other transactions with
members of the management body or their related parties and that an appropriate oversight
framework is in place at the level of the management body in its supervisory function.
12.2 Documentation of loans to members of the management
body and their related parties and additional information
129. For the purpose of Article 88(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU, institutions should document
data on loans 40 to members of the management body and their related parties properly,
including at least:
39 Business transactions include loans and other transactions (e.g. leasing, factoring, services in the context of initial public
offerings (IPOs), mergers and acquisitions, selling and buying property).
40 See also EBA Guidelines on loan origination, available under: https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-policy/credit-
risk/guidelines-on-loan-origination-and-monitoring

[Page 44]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
43
a. the name of the debtor and their status (i.e. member of the management body or related
party) and regarding loans to a related party, the member of the management bo dy to
whom the party is related and the nature of the relationship to the related party;
b. the type/nature of loan and the amount;
c. the terms and conditions applicable to the loan;
d. the date of approval of the loan;
e. the name of the individual or body and its composition taking the decision to approve the
loan and the applicable conditions;
f. the fact (yes/no) as to whether or not the loan has been granted at market conditions;
and
g. the fact (yes/no) as to whether or not the loan has been granted at conditions available
to all staff.
130. Institutions should ensure that the documentation of all loans to members of the
management body and their related parties is complete and updated and that the institution is
able to make available to competent authorities the complete documentation in an appropriate
format upon request without undue delay.
131. For a loan to a member of the management body or their related parties above an amount
of EUR 200 000, institutions should be able to provide to the competent authority upon request
the following additional information:
a. the percentage of the loan and the percentage of the sum of all outstanding
amounts of loans towards the same debtor compared to:
i. the sum of its Tier 1 capital and Tier 2 capital and
ii. common equity Tier-1 capital of the institution;
b. whether the loan is part of a large exposure 41; and
c. the relative weight of the aggregated sum of all outstanding amounts of loans
towards the same debtor, calculated as a percentage by dividing the total
outstanding amount by the total amount of all outstanding loans to members of
the management body and their related parties.
13 Internal alert procedures
132. Institutions should put in place and maintain appropriate internal alert policies and
procedures for staff to report potential or actual breaches of regulatory or internal
requirements, including, but not limited to, those of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and national
41 See also Part IV of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and in particular Article 392.

[Page 45]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
44
provisions transposing Directive 2013/36/EU, or of internal governance arrangements, through
a specific, independent and autonomous channel. It should not be necessary for reporting staff
to have evidence of a breach; however, they should have a sufficient level of certainty that
provides sufficient reason to launch an investigation . Institutions should also implement
appropriate processes and procedures that ensure that they comply with their obligations
under the national implementation of Directive (EU) 2019/1937 of the European Parliament
and of the Cou ncil of 23 October 2019 on the protection of persons who report breaches of
Union law.
133. To avoid conflicts of interest , it should be possible for staff to report breaches outside
regular reporting lines (e.g. through the compliance function, the internal audit function or an
independent internal whistleblowing procedure) . The alert procedures should ensure the
protection of the personal data of both the person who reports t he breach and the natural
person who is allegedly responsible for the breach, in accordance with Regulation (EU)
2016/67942 (GDPR).
134. The alert procedures should be made available to all staff within an institution.
135. Information provided by staff through the alert procedures should, if appropriate, be made
available to the management body and other responsible functions defined within the internal
alert policy. Where required by the staff member reporting a breach, the information should
be provided to the management body and other responsible functions in an anonymised way.
Institutions may also provide for a whistleblowing process that allows information to be
submitted in an anonymised way.
136. Institutions should ensure that the person reporting the breach is appropriately protected
from any negative impact, e.g. retaliation, discrimination or other types of unfair treatment.
The institution should ensure that no person under the institution’s control engages in
victimisation of a person who has reported a breach and should take appropriate measures
against those responsible for any such victimisation.
137. Institutions should also protect persons who have been reported from any negative effects
in case the investigation finds no evidence that justifies taking measures against that person. If
measures are taken, the institution should take them in a way that aims to protect the person
concerned from unintended negative effects that go beyond the objective of the measure
taken.
138. In particular, internal alert procedures should:
a. be documented (e.g. staff handbooks);
b. provide clear rules that ensure th at information on the reporting and the reported
persons and the breach are treated confidentially, in accordance with Regulation (EU)
42 Regulation (EU) 2016/679 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 27 April 2016 on the protection of natural
persons with regard to the processing of personal data and on the free movement of such data, and repealin g
Directive 95/46/EC (General Data Protection Regulation)

[Page 46]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
45
2016/679, unless disclosure is required under national law in the context of further
investigations or subsequent judicial proceedings;
c. protect staff who raise concerns from being victimised because they have disclosed
reportable breaches;
d. ensure that the potential or actual breaches raised are assessed and escal ated,
including as appropriate to the relevant competent authority or law enforcement
agency;
e. ensure, where possible, that confirmation of receipt of information is provided to staff
who have raised potential or actual breaches;
f. ensure the tracking of the outcome of an investigation into a reported breach; and
g. ensure appropriate record keeping.
14 Reporting of breaches to competent authorities
139. Competent authorities should establish effective and reliable mechanisms to enable
institutions’ staff to report to competent authorities relevant potential or actual breaches of
regulatory requirements, including, but not limited to, those of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
and national provisions transposing Directive 2013/36/EU. These mechanisms should include
at least:
a. specific procedures for the receipt of reports on breaches and follow-up, for instance
a dedicated whistleblowing department, unit or function;
b. appropriate protection as referred to in Section 13;
c. protection of the personal data of both the natural person who reports the breach and
the natural person who is allegedly responsible for the breach, in accordance with
Regulation (EU) 2016/679 (GDPR); and
d. clear procedures as set out in Section 13.
140. Without prejudice to the possibility of reporting breaches through the competent
authorities’ mechanisms, competent authorities may encourage staff to first try and seek to
use their institutions’ internal alert procedures.

[Page 47]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
46
Title V – Internal control framework and mechanisms
15 Internal control framework
141. Institutions should develop and maintain a culture that encourage s a positive attitude
towards risk control and compliance within the institution and a robust and comprehensive
internal control framework . Under this framework, institutions’ business lines should be
responsible for managing the risks they incur in conducting their activities and should have
controls in place that aim to ensure compliance with internal and external requirements. As
part of this framework, institutions should have internal control functions with appropriate and
sufficient authority, stature and access to the management body to fulfil their mission, and a
risk management framework.
142. The internal control framework of institutions should be adapted on an individual basis to
the specificity of its business, its complexity and the associated risks, taking into account the
group context. Institutions should organise the exchange of the necessary information in a
manner that ensures that each management body, bus iness line and internal unit, including
each internal control function , is able to carry out its duties. This means , for example, a
necessary exchange of adequate information between the business lines and the compliance
function and the AML/CFT compliance function where it is a separate control function, at the
group level and between the heads of the internal control functions at the group level and the
management body of the institution.
143. Institutions should implement appropriate processes and procedures that ensure that they
comply with their obligations in the context of combating money laundering and terrorist
financing. Institutions should assess their exposure to the risk that they may be used fo r the
purpose of ML/TF and, where necessary, take mitigating measures to reduce those risks as well
as their operational and reputational risks linked to them. Institutions should take measures to
ensure that their staff is aware of such ML/TF risks and th e impact that ML/TF has on the
institution and the integrity of the financial system.
144. The internal control framework should cover the whole organisation, including the
management body ’s responsibilities and tasks , and the activities of all business lines and
internal units, including internal control functions , outsourced activi ties and distribution
channels.
145. The internal control framework of an institution should ensure:
a. effective and efficient operations;
b. prudent conduct of business;
c. adequate identification, measurement and mitigation of risks;

[Page 48]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
47
d. the reliability of financial and non-financial information reported both internally and
externally;
e. sound administrative and accounting procedures; and
f. compliance with laws, regula tions, supervisory r equirements and the institution’s
internal policies, processes, rules and decisions.
16 Implementing an internal control framework
146. The management body should be responsible for establishing and monitoring the adequacy
and effectiveness of the internal control framework, processes and mechanisms, and for
overseeing all business lines and internal units, including internal control functions (such as risk
management, compliance , AML/CFT compliance , where separate from the compliance
function, and internal audit functions) . Institutions should establish, maintain and regularly
update adequate written internal control policies, mechanisms and procedures, which should
be approved by the management body.
147. An institution should have a clear, transparent and documented decision-making process
and a clear allocation of responsibilities and authority within its internal control framework,
including its business lines, internal units and internal control functions.
148. Institutions should communicate those policies, mechanisms and procedures to all staff
and every time material changes have been made.
149. When implementing the internal control framework, institutions should establish adequate
segregation of duties – e.g. entrusting conflicting activities within the processing of transactions
or when providing services to different persons , or entrusting supervisory and reporting
responsibilities for conflicting activities to different persons – and establish information
barriers, e.g. through the physical separation of certain departments.
150. The internal control functions should verify that the policies, mechanisms and procedures
set out in the internal control framework are correctly implemented in their respective areas
of competence.
151. Internal control functions should regularly submit to the management body written reports
on major identified deficiencies. These reports should include, for each new identified major
deficiency, the relevant risks involved, an impact assessment, recommendations and corrective
measures to be taken. The management body should follow up on the findings of the internal
control functions in a timely and effective manner and require adequate remedial actions . A
formal follow-up procedure on findings and corrective measures taken should be put in place.

[Page 49]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
48
17 Risk management framework
152. As part of the overall internal control framework, institutions should have a holistic
institution-wide risk management framework extending across all its business lines and internal
units, including internal control functions, recognising fully the economic substance of all its
risk exposures. The risk management framework should enable the institution to make fully
informed decisions on risk-taking. The risk management framework should encompass on- and
off-balance-sheet risks as well as actual risks and future risks that the institution may be
exposed to. Risks should be evaluated from the bottom up and from the top down, within and
across business lines, using consistent terminology and compatible methodologies throughout
the institution and at consolidated or sub -consolidated level. All relevant risks should be
encompassed in the risk management framework with appropriate consideration of both
financial and non-financial risks, including credit, market, liquidity, concentration, operational,
IT, reputational, legal, conduct, compliance with AML/CTF and other financial crime, ESG, and
strategic risks.
153. An institution’s risk management framework should include policies, procedures, risk limits
and risk controls ensuring adequate, timely and continuous identification, measurement or
assessment, monitoring, management, mitigation and reporting of the risks at the business
line, institution and consolidated or sub-consolidated levels.
154. An institution’s risk management framewo rk should provide specific guidance on the
implementation of its strategies. This guidance should, where appropriate, establish and
maintain internal limits consistent with the institution’s risk appetite and commensurate with
its sound operation, financia l strength , capital base and strategic goals. An institution’s risk
profile should be kept within these established limits. The risk management framework should
ensure that, whenever breaches of risk limits occur, there is a defined process to escalate and
address them with an appropriate follow-up procedure.
155. The risk management framework should be subject to independent internal review, e.g.
performed by the internal audit function, and reassessed regularly against the institution’s risk
appetite, taking i nto account information from the risk management function and, where
established, the risk committee. Factors that should be considered include internal and external
developments, including balance-sheet and revenue changes; any increase in the complexity of
the institution's business, risk profile or operating structure; geographic expansion; mergers
and acquisitions; and the introduction of new products or business lines.
156. When identifying and measuring or assessing risks, an institution should develop
appropriate methodologies including both forward-looking and backward-looking tools. The
methodologies should allow for the aggregation of risk exposures across business lines and
support the identification of risk concentrations. The tools should include the assessment of
the actual risk profile against the institution’s risk appetite , as well as the identification and
assessment of potential and stressed risk exposures under a range of assumed adverse
circumstances against the institution’s risk capacity. The tools should provide information on

[Page 50]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
49
any adjustment to the risk profile that may be required. Institutions should make appropriately
conservative assumptions when building stressed scenarios.
157. Institutions should take into consideration that the result s of quantitative assessment
methodologies, including stress testing, are highly dependent on the limitations and
assumptions of the models (including the severity and duration of the shock and the underlying
risks). For example, models showing very high returns on economic capital may result from a
weakness in the models (e.g. the exclusion of some relevant risks) rather than a superior
strategy or excellent execution of a strategy on the part of the institution. The determination
of the level of risk taken should not therefore be based only on quantitative information or
model outputs; it should also comprise a qualitative approach (including expert judgement and
critical analysis). Relevant macroeconomic environmental trends and data should be explicitly
addressed to identify their potential impact on exposures and portfolios.
158. The ultimate responsibility for risk assessment lies solely with the institution, which,
accordingly, should evaluate its risks critically and should not rely exclusively on external
assessments. For example, an institution should validate a purchased risk model and calibrate
it to its own individual circumstances to ensure that the model accurately and comprehensively
captures and analyses the risk.
159. Institutions should be fully aware of the limitations of models and metrics and use not only
quantitative but also qualitative risk assessment tools (including expert judgement and critical
analysis).
160. In addit ion to the institutions’ own assessments, institutions may use e xternal risk
assessments (including external credit ratings or externally purchased risk models). Institutions
should be fully aware of the exact scope of such assessments and their limitations.
161. Regular and transparent reporting mechanisms should be established so that the
management body, its risk committee, where established, and all relevant units in an institution
are provided with reports in a timely, accurate, concise, understandable and meaningful
manner and can share relevant information about the identification, measurement or
assessment, monitoring and management of risks. The reporting framework should be well
defined and documented.
162. Effective communication and awareness regarding risks and the risk strategy is crucial for
the whole risk management process, including the review and decision-making processes, and
helps prevent decisions that may unknowingly increase risk. Effective risk reporting involves
sound internal consideration and communication of risk strategy and relevant risk data (e.g.
exposures and key risk indicators), both horizontally across the institution and up and down the
management chain.

[Page 51]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
50
18 New products and significant changes 43
163. An institution should have in place a well-documented new product approval policy (NPAP),
approved by the management body, that addresses the development of new markets, products
and services, and significant changes to existing ones, as well as exceptional transactions. The
policy should in addition encompass material changes to related processes (e.g. new
outsourcing arrangements) and systems (e.g. IT change processes ). The NPAP should ensure
that approved products and changes are consistent with the risk strategy and risk appetite of
the institution and the corresponding limits of the institution, or that necessary revisions are
made.
164. Material changes or exceptional transactions may include mergers and acquisitions,
including the potential c onsequences of conducting insufficient due diligence that fails to
identify post-merger risks and liabilities; setting up structures (e.g. new subsidiaries or single-
purpose vehicles; new products; changes to systems or the risk management framework or
procedures; and changes to the institution’s organisation.
165. An institution should have specific procedures for assessing compliance with these policies,
taking into account the input of the risk management function. This should include a systematic
prior assessment and documented opinion by the compliance function for new products or
significant changes to existing products.
166. An institution’s NPAP should cover every consideration to be ta ken into account before
deciding to enter new markets, deal in new products, launch a new service, or make significant
changes to existing products or services. The NPAP should also include the definitions of ‘new
product/market/business’ and ‘ significant changes’ to be used in the organisation and the
internal functions to be involved in the decision-making process.
167. The NPAP should set out the main issues to be addressed before a decision is made. These
should include regulatory compliance; accounting; pricing models; the impact on risk profile,
capital adequacy and profitability; the availability of adequate front, back and middle office
resources; and the availability of adequate internal tools and expertise to understand and
monitor the associated risks. Furthermore, to comply with obligations under Directive (EU)
2015/849, institutions should identify and assess the ML/TF risk associated with the new
product or business practice, and set out the measures to take to mitigate those risks. The
decision to launch a new activity should clearly state the business unit and individuals
responsible for it. A new activity should not be undertaken until adequate resources to
understand and manage the associated risks are available.
168. The risk management f unction and the compliance function should be involved in
approving new products or significant changes to existing products , processes and systems.
43 See also the EBA guidelines on product oversight and governance requirements for manufacturers and distributors of
retail banking products , available at https://www.eba.europa.eu/-/eba-publishes-final-product-oversight-and-
governance-requirements-for-manufactures-and-distributors-of-retail-banking-products.

[Page 52]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
51
Their input should include a full and objective assessment of risks arising from new activities
under a variety of scenarios, of any potential shortcomings in the institution’s risk management
and internal control frameworks, and of the institution’s ability to manage any new risks
effectively. The risk management function should also have a clear overview of the roll-out of
new products (or significant changes to existing products , processes and systems ) across
different business lines and portfolios , and the power to require that changes to existing
products go through the formal NPAP process.
19 Internal control functions
169. The internal control functions should include a risk management function (see Section 20),
a compliance function (see Section 21) and an internal audit function (see Section 22). The risk
management and compliance function s should be subject to review by the internal audit
function. The responsibilities of control functions also include to ensure compliance with
AML/CTF requirements.
170. The operational tasks of the internal control functions may be outsourced , taking into
account the proportionality criteria listed in Title I, to the consolidating institution or another
entity within or outside of the group with the consent of the management bodies of the
institutions concerned. Even when internal control operational tasks are p artially or fully
outsourced, the head of the internal control function concerned and the management body are
still responsible for these activities and for maintaining an internal control function within the
institution.
171. Without prejudice to national law implementing Directive 2015/849/EU, institutions
should assign the responsibility for ensuring the institution’s compliance with the requirements
of that directive and the institution’s policies and procedures to a staff member (e.g. head of
compliance). Institutions may establish a separate AML/TF compliance function as an
independent control function.44 The person responsible for AML/CTF should, where necessary,
be able to directly report to the management body in its management and its supervisory
function.
19.1 Heads of the internal control functions
172. Heads of internal control functions should be established at an adequate hierarchical level
that provides the head of the control function with the appropriate authori ty and stature
needed to fulfil his or her responsibilities. Notwithstanding the overall responsibility of the
management body, heads of internal control functions should be independent of the business
lines or units they control. To this end, the heads of the risk management, compliance and
internal audit functions should report and be directly accountable to the management body,
and their performance should be reviewed by the management body.
44 Please refer also to the EBA Guidelines on the AML/CTF compliance function (currently under development)

[Page 53]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
52
173. Where necessary, the heads of internal control functions should be able to have access and
report directly to the management body in its supervisory function to raise concerns and warn
the supervisory function, where appropriate, when specific developments affect or may affect
the institution. This should not prevent the heads of internal control functions from reporting
within the regular reporting lines as well.
174. Institutions should have documented processes in place to assign the position of the head
of an internal control function and for withdrawing his or her responsibilities. In any case, the
heads of internal control functions should – and under Article 76(5) of Directive 2013/36/EU
the head of the risk management function must – not be removed without the prior approval
of the management body in its supervisory function. In significant institutions, competent
authorities should be promptly informed about the approval and the main reasons for the
removal of a head of an internal control function.
19.2 Independence of internal control functions
175. In order for the internal control functions to be regarded as independent , the following
conditions should be met:
a. their staff do not perform any operational tasks that fall within the scope of the
activities the internal control functions are intended to monitor and control;
b. they are organisationally separate from the activities they are assigned to monitor and
control;
c. notwithstanding the overall responsibility of members of the management body for
the institution, the head of an internal control function should not be subordinate to
a person who has responsibility for managing the activities the internal control
function monitors and controls; and
d. the remuneration of the internal control functions staff should not be linked to th e
performance of the activities the internal control function monitors and controls, and
not otherwise likely to compromise their objectivity45.
19.3 Combination of internal control functions
176. Taking into account the proportionality criteria set out in Title I, the risk management
function and compliance function may be combined. The internal audit function should not be
combined with another internal control function.
19.4 Resources of internal control functions
45 See also the EBA guidelines on sound remuneration policies, available at https://www.eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-
policy/remuneration/guidelines-on-sound-remuneration-policies.

[Page 54]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
53
177. Internal control functions should have sufficient resources. They should have an adequate
number of qualified staff (both at parent level and at subsidiary level). Staff should remain
qualified on an ongoing basis and should receive training as necessary.
178. Internal control functions should have appropriate IT systems and support at their disposal,
with access to the internal and external information necessary to meet their responsibilities.
They should have access to all necessary information regarding all business lines and relevant
risk-bearing subsidiaries, in particular those that can potentially generate material risks for the
institutions.
20 Risk management function
179. Institutions should establish a risk management function (RMF) covering the whole
institution. The RMF should have sufficient authority, stature and resources, taking into
account the proportionality criteria listed in Title I, to implement risk policies and the risk
management framework as set out in Section 17.
180. The RMF should have , where necessary, direct access to the management body in its
supervisory function and its committees, where established, including in particular the risk
committee.
181. The RMF should have access to all business lines and other internal units that have the
potential to generate risk, as well as to relevant subsidiaries and affiliates.
182. Staff within the RMF should possess sufficient knowledge, skills and experience in relation
to risk management techniques and procedures, and markets and products, and should have
access to regular training.
183. The RMF should be independent of the business lines and units whose risks it controls but
should not be prevented from interact ing with them . Interaction between the operational
functions and the RMF should help to achieve the objective of all the institution’s staff bearing
responsibility for managing risk.
184. The RMF should be a central organisational feature of the institution, structured so that it
can implement risk policies and control the risk management framework. The RMF should play
a key role in ensuring that the institution has effective risk management processes in place. The
RMF should be actively involved in all material risk management decisions.
185. Significant institutions may consider establishing dedicated RMFs for each material
business lin e. However, there should be a central RMF , including a group RMF in the
consolidating institution, to deliver an institution- and group-wide holistic view on all risks and
to ensure that the risk strategy is complied with.
186. The RMF should provide relevant independent information, analyses and expert judgement
on risk exposures, and advice on proposals and risk decisions made by business lines or internal

[Page 55]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
54
units, and should inform the management body as to whether they are consistent with the
institution’s risk strategy and risk appetite. The RMF may recommend improvements to the risk
management framework and corrective measures to remedy breaches of risk policies,
procedures and limits.
20.1 RMF’s role in risk strategy and decisions
187. The RMF should be actively involved at an early stage in elaborating the institution’s risk
strategy and in ensuring that the institution has effective risk management processes in place.
The RMF should provide the management body with all relevant risk -related information to
enable it to set the institution’s risk appetite level. The RMF should assess the robustness and
sustainability of the risk strategy and appetite. It should ensure that the risk appetite is
appropriately translated into specific risk limits. The RMF should also assess the risk strategies
and risk appetite of business units, including targets proposed by the business units, and should
be involved before a decision is made by the management body concerning the risk strategies
and risk appetite. Targets should be plausible and consistent with the institution’s risk strategy.
188. The RMF’s involvement in decision -making processes should ensure that risk
considerations are taken into account appropriately. However, accountability for the decisions
taken should remain with the business and internal units, and ultimately the management
body.
20.2 RMF’s role in material changes
189. In line with Section 18, before decisions on material changes or exceptional transactions
are taken, the RMF should be involved in the evaluation of the impact of such changes and
exceptional transactions on the institution’s and group’s overall risk , and should report its
findings directly to the management body before a decision is taken.
190. The RMF should evaluate how risks identified could affect the institution’s or group’s ability
to manage its risk profile , its liquidity and its sound capital base under normal and adverse
circumstances.
20.3 RMF’s role in identifying, measuring, assessing,
managing, mitigating, monitoring and reporting risks
191. The RMF should ensure that there is an appropriate risk management framework and that
all risks are identified, assessed, measured, monitored, managed and properly reported on by
the relevant units in the institution.
192. The RMF should ensure that identification and assessment are not based only on
quantitative information or model outputs, but also take into account qualitative approaches.
The RMF should keep the management body informed of the assumptions used in and potential
shortcomings of the risk models and analysis.

[Page 56]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
55
193. The RMF should ensure that transactions with related parties are reviewed and that the
risks they pose for the institution are identified and adequately assessed.
194. The RMF should ensure that all identified risks are effectively monitored by the business
units.
195. The RMF should regularly monitor the actual risk profile of the institution and scrutinise it
against the institution’s strategic goals and risk appetite to enable decision -making by the
management body in its management function and challenge by the management body in its
supervisory function.
196. The RMF should analyse trends and recognise new or emerging risks and risk increases
arising from changing circumstances and conditions. It should also regularly review actual risk
outcomes against previous estimates (i.e. back testing) to assess and improve the accuracy and
effectiveness of the risk management process.
197. The RMF should evaluate possible ways to mitigate risks. Reporting to the management
body should include proposed appropriate risk-mitigating actions.
20.4 RMF’s role in unapproved exposures
198. The RMF should independently assess breach es of risk appetite or limits (including
ascertaining the cause and undertaking a legal and economic a nalysis of the actual cost of
closing, reducing or hedging the exposure against the potential cost of keeping it) . The RMF
should inform the business units concerned and the management body , and recommend
possible remedies. The RMF should report directly to the management body in its supervisory
function when the breach is material, without prejudice for the RMF to report to other internal
functions and committees.
199. The RMF should play a key role in ensuring a decision on its recommendation is made at
the relevant level, complied with by the relevant business units and appropriately reported to
the management body and, where established, the risk committee.
20.5 Head of the risk management function
200. The head of the RMF should be responsible for providing comprehensive and
understandable information on risks and advising the management body, enabling this body to
understand the institution’s overall risk profile. The same applies to the head of the RMF of a
parent institution regarding the consolidated situation.
201. The head of the RMF should have sufficient expertise, independence and seniority to
challenge decisions that affect an institution’s exposure to risks. When the head of the RMF is
not a member of the management body, significant institutions should appoint an independent
head of the RMF who has no responsibilities for other functions and reports directly to the
management body. Where it is not proportionate to appoint a person who is dedicated only to

[Page 57]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
56
the role of head of the RMF, taking into account the principle of proportionality as set out in
Title I, this function can be combined with the head of the compliance function or can be
performed by another senior person , provided there is no conflict of interest between the
functions combined. In any ca se, this person should have sufficient authority, stature and
independence (e.g. head of legal).
202. The head of the RMF should be able to challenge decisions taken by the institution’s
management and its management body, and the grounds for o bjections should be formally
documented. If an institution wishes to grant the head of the RMF the right to veto decisions
(e.g. a credit or investment decision or the setting of a limit) made at levels below the
management body, it should specify the scope of such a veto right , the escalation or appeal
procedures, and how the management body will be involved.
203. Institutions should establish strengthened processes for the approval of decisions on which
the head of the RMF has expressed a negative view. The management body in its supervisory
function should be able to communicate directly with the head of the RMF on key risk issues,
including developments that may be inconsistent with the institution’s risk strategy and risk
appetite.
21 Compliance function
204. Institutions should establish a permanent and effective compliance function to manage
compliance risk, and should appoint a person to be responsible for this function across the
entire institution (the compliance officer or head of compliance).
205. Where it is not proportionate to appoint a person who is dedicated only to the role of head
of compliance, taking into account the principle of proportionality as set out in Title I, this
function can be combined with the head of the RMF or can be performed by another senior
person (e.g. head o f legal), provided there is no conflict of interest between the functions
combined.
206. The compliance function, including the head of compliance, should be independent of the
business lines and internal units it controls and have sufficient authority, stature and resources.
Taking into account the proportionality criteria set out in Title I, this function may be assisted
by the RMF or combined with the RMF or other appropriate functions, e.g. the legal division or
human resources.
207. Staff within the compliance function should possess sufficient knowledge, skills and
experience in relation to compliance and relevant procedures, and should have access to
regular training.
208. The management body in its supervisory function should oversee the implementation of a
well-documented compliance policy, which should be communicated to all staff. Institutions
should set up a process to regularly assess changes in the law and regulations applicable to its
activities.

[Page 58]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
57
209. The compliance function should advise the management body on measures to be taken to
ensure compliance with applicable laws, rules, regulations and standards , and should assess
the possible impact of any changes in the legal or regulatory environment on the institution’s
activities and compliance framework.
210. The compliance function should ensure that compliance monitoring is carried out through
a structured and well -defined compliance monitoring programme and that the compliance
policy is observed . The compliance function should report to the management body and
communicate as appropriate with the RMF on the institution’s compliance risk and its
management. The compliance function and the RMF should cooperate and exchange
information as appropriate to perform their respective tasks. The findings of the compliance
function should be taken into account by the management body and the RMF in decision -
making processes.
211. In line with Section 18 of these guidelines, t he compliance function should also verify, in
close cooperation with the RMF and the legal unit, that new products and new procedures
comply with the current legal framework and, where appropriate, with any known forthcoming
changes to legislation, regulations and supervisory requirements.
212. Institutions should take appropriate action against internal or external behaviour that could
facilitate or enable fraud, ML /TF or other financial crime and breaches of discipline (e.g.
breaches of internal procedures, breaches of limits).
213. Institutions should ensure that their subsidiaries and branches take steps to ensure that
their operations are compliant with local laws and regulations . If local laws and regulations
hamper the application of stricter procedures and compliance systems implemented by the
group, especially if they prevent the disclosure and exchange of necessary information between
entities within the group, subsidiaries and branches should inform the compliance officer or
the head of compliance of the consolidating institution.
22 Internal audit function
214. Institutions should set up an independent and effective internal audit function (IAF), taking
into account the proportionality criteria set out in Title I, and should appoint a person to be
responsible for this function across the entire institution. The IAF should be independent and
have sufficient authority, stature and resources. In particular, the institution should ensure that
the qualification of the IAF’s staff members and the IAF’s resources, in particular its auditing
tools and risk analysis methods, are adequate for the institution’s size and locations, and the
nature, scale and complexity of the risks associated with the institution’s business model,
activities, risk culture and risk appetite.
215. The IAF should be independent of the audited activities. Therefore, the IAF should not be
combined with other functions.

[Page 59]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
58
216. The IAF should , following a risk -based approach, independently review and provide
objective assurance of the compliance of all activities and units of an institution, including
outsourced activities, with the institution’s policies and procedures and with regulatory
requirements. Each entity within the group should fall within the scope of the IAF.
217. The IAF should not be involved in designing, selecting, establishing and implementing
specific internal control policies, mechanisms and procedures , and risk limits. However, this
should not prevent the management body in its management function from requesting input
from internal audit on matters related to risk, internal controls and compliance with applicable
rules.
218. The IAF should assess whether the institution’s internal control framework as set out in
Section 15 is both effective and efficient. In particular, the IAF should assess:
a. the appropriateness of the institution’s governance framework;
b. whether existing policies and procedures remain adequate and comply with legal and
regulatory requirements and with the risk strategy and risk appetite of the institution;
c. the compliance of the procedures with the applicable laws and regulations and with
decisions of the management body;
d. whether the procedures are correctly and effectively implemented (e.g. compliance of
transactions, the level of risk effectively incurred, etc.); and
e. the adequacy, quality and effectiveness of the controls performed and the reporting
done by the defence business units and the risk management and compliance
functions.
219. The IAF should verify, in particular, the integrity of the processes ensuring the reliability of
the institution’s methods and techniques, and the assumptions and sources of information
used in its internal models ( e.g. risk modelling and accounting measurements). It should also
evaluate the quality and use of qualitative risk identification and assessment tools and the risk
mitigation measures taken.
220. The IAF should have unfettered institution-wide access to all the records, documents,
information and buildings of the institution. This should include access to management
information systems and minutes of all committees and decision-making bodies.
221. The IAF should adhere to national and international professional standards. An example of
the professional standards referred to here is the standards established by the Institute of
Internal Auditors.
222. Internal audit work should be performed in accordance with an audit plan and a detailed
audit programme following a risk-based approach.

[Page 60]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
59
223. An internal audit plan should be drawn up at least once a year on the basis of the annual
internal audit control objectives. The internal audit plan should be approved by the
management body.
224. All audit recommendations should be subject to a formal follow -up procedure by the
appropriate levels of management to ensure and report on their effective and timely
resolution.
Title VI – Business continuity management 46
225. Institutions should establish a sound business continuity management and recovery plan
to ensure their ability to operate on an ongoing basis and to limit losses in the event of severe
business disruption.
226. Institutions may establish a specific independent business continuity function, e.g. as part
of the RMF47.
227. An institution’s business relies on several critical resources (e.g. IT systems, including cloud
services, communication systems, core staff and buildings). The purpose of business continuity
management is to reduce the operational, financial, legal, reputational and other material
consequences arising from a di saster or extended interruption to these resources and
consequent disruption to the institution’s ordinary business procedures. Other risk
management measures might be intended to reduce the probability of such incidents or to
transfer their financial impact to third parties (e.g. through insurance).
228. In order to establish a sound business continuity management plan, an institution should
carefully analyse risk factors for and its exposure to severe business disruptions and assess
(quantitatively and qualitatively) their potential impact, using internal and/or external data and
scenario analysis. This analysis should cover all business lines and internal units, including the
RMF, and should take into account their interdependency. The results of the analysis should
contribute to defining the institution’s recovery priorities and objectives.
229. On the basis of the abovementioned analysis, an institution should put in place:
a. contingency and busine ss continuity plans to ensure that the institution reacts
appropriately to emergencies and is able to maintain its most important business
activities if there is disruption to its ordinary business procedures; and
46 Institutions should also refer to the EBA Guidelines on ICT risk:, available under: https://eba.europa.eu/regulation-and-
policy/internal-governance/guidelines-on-ict-and-security-risk-management
47 Please refer also to Article 312 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.

[Page 61]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
60
b. recovery plans for critical resources to e nable the institution to return to ordinary
business procedures in an appropriate timeframe. Any residual risk from potential
business disruptions should be consistent with the institution’s risk appetite.
230. Contingency, business continuity and recovery plans should be documented and carefully
implemented. The documentation should be available within the business lines, internal units
and RMF, and should be stored on systems that are physically separated and readily accessible
in case of contingency. Appropriate training should b e provided. Plans should be regularly
tested and updated. Any challenges or failures occurring in the tests should be documented
and analysed, with the plans reviewed accordingly.
Title VII – Transparency
231. Strategies, policies and procedures sh ould be communicated to all relevant staff
throughout an institution. An institution’s staff should understand and adhere to policies and
procedures pertaining to their duties and responsibilities.
232. Accordingly, the management body should inform and update the relevant staff about the
institution’s strategies and policies in a clear and consistent way, at least to the level needed to
carry out their particular duties. This may be done through written guidelines, manuals or other
means.
233. Where parent undertakings are required by competent authorities under Article 106(2) of
Directive 2013/36/EU to publish annually a description of their legal structure and governance
and the organisational structure of the group of institutions, the information should include all
entities within the group structure as defined in Directive 2013/34/EU48, by country.
234. The publication should include at least:
a. an overview of the internal organisation of the institutions and the group structure as
defined in Directive 2013/34/EU and changes there to, including the main repor ting
lines and responsibilities;
b. any material changes since the previous publication and the date of the material
change;
c. new legal, governance or organisational structures;
d. information on the structure, organisation and members of the management body,
including the number of its members and the number of those qualified as
48 Directive 2013/34/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on the annual financial
statements, consolidated financial statements and related reports of certain types of undertakings, amendin g
Directive 2006/43/EC of the European Pa rliament and of the Council and repealing Council Directives 78/660/EEC and
83/349/EEC (OJ L 182, 29.6.2013, p. 19).

[Page 62]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
61
independent, and specifying the gender and duration of the mandate of each member
of the management body;
e. the key responsibilities of the management body;
f. a list of the committees of the management body in its supervisory function and their
composition;
g. an overview of the conflict of interest policy applicable to the institution and to the
management body;
h. an overview of the internal control framework; and
i. an overview of the business continuity management framework.

[Page 63]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
62
Annex I – Aspects to take into account
when developing an internal governance
policy
In line with Title III, institutions should consider the following aspects when documenting internal
governance policies and arrangements:
1. Shareholder structure
2. Group structure, if applicable (legal and functional structure)
3. Composition and functioning of the management body
a) selection criteria, including how diversity is taken into account
b) number, length of mandate, rotation, age
c) independent members of the management body
d) executive members of the management body
e) non-executive members of the management body
f) internal division of tasks, if applicable
4. Governance structure and organisation chart (with impact on the group, if applicable)
a) specialised committees
i. composition
ii. functioning
b) executive committee, if any
i. composition
ii. functioning
5. Key function holders
a) head of the risk management function
b) head of the compliance function
c) head of the internal audit function
d) chief financial officer
e) other key function holders
6. Internal control framework
a) description of each function, including its organisation, resources, stature and
authority
7. Description of the risk strategy and risk management framework

[Page 64]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
63
8. Organisational structure (with impact on the group, if applicable)
a) operational structure, business lines, and allocation of competences and
responsibilities
b) outsourcing
c) range of products and services
d) geographical scope of business
e) provision of services under the regime of freedom of provision of services
f) branches
g) subsidiaries, joint ventures, etc.
h) use of offshore centres
9. Code of conduct and behaviour (with impact on the group, if applicable)
a) strategic objectives and company values
b) internal codes and regulations, prevention policy
c) conflict of interest policy
d) whistleblowing
10. Status of the internal governance policy, with date
a) development
b) last amendment
c) last assessment
d) approval by the management body.

[Page 65]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
64
5. Accompanying documents
5.1. Draft cost-benefit analysis/impact assessment
1. Article 16(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council
of 24 November 2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Banking
Authority) (EBA Regulation) provides that the EBA should carry out an analysis of ‘the potential
related costs and benefits’ of any guidelines it develops. This analysis should provide an
overview of the findings regarding the problem to be dealt with, the solutions proposed and
the potential impact of these options.
A. Problem identification and policy objectives
2. Directive 2013/36/EU has been amended. The EBA Guidelines on internal governance needed
to be amended to reflect those changes and to align their wording with other EBA work.
3. The amendments to the guidelines should ensure that institutions have specific governance
arrangements regarding the management of money laundering and terrorist financing risks
and to avoid that they contribute to dividend arbitrage schemes. Institutions should also have
a strong framework to manage conflicts of interests and ensure prudent decision-making in
the context of loans to related parties.
B. Baseline scenario
4. The current EU legislative framework for institutions’ internal governance consists mainly of
Directive 2013/36/EU, the EBA guidelines on internal governance, the EBA Guidelines on the
assessment of the suitability of members of the management body and key function holders
and the EBA Guidelines on outsourcing.
5. The impact assessment covers guidelines developed to ensure the harmonised application of
additional governance requirements introduced by Directive 2013/36/EU and areas where the
policy has changed. Areas that have not changed in substance and the underlying changes
introduced by the Directive 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 have not been
assessed.
C. Options considered
6. Guidelines have been provided on the code of conduct that link the g uidelines to the
requirements on non-discrimination and equal opportunities within the European Charter of
Fundamental Rights and the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union. Those additions
have no impact as the underlying provisions are fundamental principles that are already

[Page 66]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
65
implemented by Member States based on the aforementioned frameworks. The EBA has to
take those frameworks into account when setting out guidelines.
7. The guidelines provide additional clarity about the institutions internal governance in the
context of AML/CTF provisions. Institutions should already have sufficient governance
arrangements in place to ensure that they comply with Anti-Money Laundering, Anti-Terrorist
Financing and tax laws. The related risks are already covered by the CRD requirement on
institutions to manage all their risks. Hence, the clarifications provided in the guidelines should
not trigger any implementation costs if the institution concerned already had the required
arrangements in place and had implemented the requirements under Directive (EU) 2015/849
of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May 2015.
8. In addition the guidelines have been clarified regarding the management of conflicts of
interest in relation to loans and other transactions to members of the management body and
their related parties. Given that specific provisions have been added to Directive 2013/36/EU
it was considered necessary to clarify the regulatory expectations and the requirements with
regard to the documentation of such loans and the management of related conflicts of
interest. It is necessary that institutions documen t all loans and transactions . The specific
documentation elements on such loans in the guidelines are limited and do not create a
material burden. The need to identify such loans, to document them and to comply with the
GDPR in this context is created by the requirement within the Capital Requirements Directive
(CRD). Hence, the costs for those aspects are not assessed as part of this impact assessment.
9. The objective of the changes are that there is sufficient scrutiny on decisions regarding such
loans and that conflicts of interest in that context are appropriately managed. Restricting the
guidelines to loans to members of the management body and their related parties would not
be effective as other transaction s might also create material conflicts of interests. Limited
additional documentation elements regarding the conditions of such loans as compared to
market conditions and their volumes are necessary to assess the appropriateness of the
management of conflicts of interests. Given the need to document contractual conditions and
to comply e.g. with the large loan regime it is assessed that the additional costs for providing
the additional information, when requested, is low.
10. In line with the principle of proportionality, the guidelines differentiate between material and
non-material loans and transactions. The guidelines further specify the already existing CRD
requirements for all institutions.
D. Cost-benefit analysis
11. Given the limited amendments to the guidelines and given that they are based on
amendments of Directive 2013/36/EU and other existing legal requirements, it is assumed that
changes to the guidelines create no or very low implementation costs for updates to internal
policies and additional documentation.

[Page 67]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
66
5.2. Summary of responses to the consultation and the EBA’s
analysis
The EBA published its consultation paper on 31 July 2020 and received overall 18 responses; 16 of
them were published, while the other 2 have been submitted on a confidential basis. The
consultation was limited to the changes made to the guidelines previously in place. Therefore,
comments received on guidelines that have not been amended are in general not included in the
feedback table. The Banking Stakeholder Group did not submit an opinion.
The main comments received challenged the chapter on related party transactions and the manner
in which the topic of anti-money laundering has been integrated into the guidelines.
Many respondents challenged the legal basis to ask institutions for specific actions regarding third
party transactions, while the CRD includes only specific documentation requirements on loans to
members of the management body and their related parties.
The submission of information on loans to members of the management body and their related
parties is set out in Article 88 of the CRD, and the management of conflicts of interests is also
explicitly required under Article 88 of the CRD. Decisions on related party loans and transactions
should be made objectively and related conflicts of interests must be identified and managed. The
guidelines have been aligned with the CRD requirements and specify them further. The guidelines
further specify how conflicts of interest in this context should be managed and which information
on such loans should be made available to competent authorities upon request.
Many institutions had objections to the provision that a member of the management body should
be identified as being responsible for implementation of the requirements in Directive 2018/843
(AMLD V) on anti-money laundering and terrorist financing. Moreover, some respondents would
prefer to remove the guidance provided in light of other upcoming EBA work on this topic.
The guidelines have been aligned with the requirements under AMLD V, which is in the scope of
the EBA’s action. Institutions’ governance arrangements must take into account the risks that can
emerge from being involved or being exploited in the context of money laundering and terrorist
financing. The management body bears the overall responsibility for implementing the related
policies and processes. However, many national laws, in line with the AMLD V, indeed foresee that
companies that are subject to the AMLD V must identify one member of the management body,
where such a body exists, as being responsible. The EBA is working on additional guidelines on AML
compliance, while the guidelines on inter nal governance set out high level principles on AML
compliance and principles on the management of risks triggered by ML/TF risk factors. The
AML/CTF framework is part of institutions governance arrangements and therefore the topic has
been retained within the guidelines.
Other comments received concern the principles included regarding non-discrimination and equal
opportunities and respondents found that those guidelines would exceed the EBA’s mandate.

[Page 68]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
67
All institutions are not only subject to the CRD and CRR requirements, but also to other laws and
regulations. The code of conduct and working conditions are part of institutions’ governance
arrangements. When setting out guidelines under the mandates received under the CRD, the EBA
also has to take into account the values of the European Union and other directives and regulations
in place, including the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, the European Charter of
Fundamental Rights and the Directive of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 July 2006
on the implementation of the principle of equal opportunities and equal treatment of men and
women in matters of employment and occupation.
A detailed analysis of the comments received is included in the feedback table below.

[Page 69]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
68
Summary of responses to the consultation and the EBA’s analysis
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
General comments
Date of application Several respondents suggest postponing the date of
application to duly take into account the time needed for
the CRD and Investment Firm Directive ( IFD) national
transposition processes, translations of the guidelines ( GL)
into the EU languages and the ‘comply and explain’
procedures.
The EBA appreciates that the implementation of the revised
guidelines will require some time and has postponed the date of
application. However, the guidelines (GL) do not change the
timelines for the implementation of natio nal laws that will have
entered into force.
GL amended
Definitions
Some respondents recommend ensuring alignment to the
definitions provided in the EBA GL on fitness and propriety.
More specifically, reference is made to the definitions of
‘prudential con solidation’ and ‘relevant institution’.
The EBA has reviewed the mentioned guidelines and ensured that
definitions are consistent. However, smaller differentiations were
necessary, given their different scope of application , e.g. the term
‘relevant institution’ also includes Class 2 investment firms, while
the present GL do not apply to such investment firms. The definition
of ‘prudential consolidation’ has been added for the sake of
completeness, while it is , in principle , not necessary as the method
to be used and its scope is set out in Regulat ion (EU) 575/2013.
GL amended
Scope of application
Some respondents ask for further clarifications regarding
the scope of application, especially related to the
prudential consolid ation, materiality o f risks and other
transactions.
All institutions that are subject to Directive 2013/36/EU (CRD) are
within the scope of application of the guidelines. The requirements
on governance under the CRD apply on an individual and
consolidated basis, unless the waivers in Article 21 of the CRD are
applied.
All institutions are subject to the provisions on related party loans
in the CRD and the requirement to manage conflicts of interests
(COI). The GL set out further details on how institutions should
manage such COI also in the context of other transac tions.
No change

[Page 70]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
69
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
The scope of application is not affected by the materiality of risks.
The materiality of risks and the needed risk management measures
depend on the business model of the institution, its risk appetite,
risk bearing capacity and all relevant risk factors.
Application of national
and sector-specific law
On several occasions respondents asked to add references
to relevant national or sector -specific requirements that
apply to subsidiaries.
The GL aim to achieve harmonisation on an EU level. All institutions
and all their subsidiaries have to comply with all applicable Union
and national legal requirements without this fact being stated in
guidelines. A sentence has been added to the background section.
Background
amended
Definitions A few respondents suggest adding a definition on
´Management Body´ and ´Senior Management´ (to the
guidelines.
The named definitions are provided within the CRR and the CRD. No change
Anti-discrimination
policies Some respondents complain about the lack of legal basis
for the introduction of the requirement to adopt these
policies, both in the Charter of Fundamental Rights and in
banking supervision law (CRD V).
Anti-discrimination rules are a part of robust governance
arrangements, The guidelin es determine how compliance should be
achieved. The legal mandate is provided in Article 74 CRD and
Art. 16 of the EBA founding regulation. When providing guidelines,
the EBA also has to take into account the Treaty, European Charter
of Fundamental Rights and other EU Directiv es and Regulations.
No change
Anti-discrimination
policies
Considering that some national legal frameworks already
provide requirements on the adoption of non -
discrimination policies, some respondent s suggest
adopting a more proportional approach to ensure non -
discrimination and consider the policies that are already in
place to suffice for complying with the GL.
Where policies are in place that ensure compliance with the GL, it is
not necessary to create new policies. It is important that institutions
take appropriate measures to ensure that there is no
discrimination. Such measures need to be documented.
GL amended
Anti-discrimination
policies
With specific regard to gender -neutral policies, some
respondents seek guidance on their application in smaller
banks and/or in dual board structures. In small banks
adopting a dual board governance structure, the
While institutions need to take into account the gender balance
when recruiting new members of the management body, there is
no guideline included that requires a certain minimum
represen tation. Having a gender -neutral remuneration policy does
No change

[Page 71]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
70
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
management body often consists of only two memb ers,
who usually hold this position for a longer period of time.
For them, a gender -balanced composition would mean
that one board member should always be a woman.
not require having male and female members of the management
body in its management function. The compos ition of the
management body should be subject to a diversity policy. With
small management boards, a more diverse approach could also be
achieved by having a more gender -balanced supervisory function.
ML/FT risks in the
internal control and
general risk management
framework
Several respondents suggest clarifying if the GL aim to
integrate the AML/CTF check in the general risk
management. If so, clarifications are also needed on the
effects on the responsibilities within the credit institutions.
For some respondents, AML should not be arbitrarily
dropped into the ‘overarching internal controls’ section. It
should instead be included within its own sub-heading as a
sub-topic.
A few respondents commented that the results of the
AML/CTF check should not have any impact on regulatory
requirements, especially not on capital requirements; a
negative result of the AML/CTF check can only result in the
rejection or increased monit oring of the business
relationship.
Many respondents recommend more proportionality on
the requirement to adopt specific risk mitigation
measures: they evidence that, with regard to operational
and reputational risks arising from ML/TF risks, such
measures are not necessary for all institutions, depending
largely on the nature and complexity of individual business
activities.
The GL have been clarified. Institutions need to take into account
money laundering and terrorist financing (ML/TF) risk factors in
their general risk management. However, they also need to ensure
compliance with the provisions under Directive (EU) 2015/849
(AMLD), including that they implement appropriate AML/CTF
controls. While both issues are related, their context
(prudential/compli ance) differs.
While the AMLD requires specific measures, the present guidelines
deal with the internal governance of institutions and its risk
management in more general. Hen ce, singling out AML provisions,
rather than integrating such requirements in the control
framework, has not been seen as appropriate. Moreover, the EBA is
going to issue additional guidelines in the are a of AML/CTF
compliance.
In any case, institutions need to be aware that AML/CTF breaches
can also lead to operational and reputationa l risks and, if
systematic, doubts regarding the suitability of members of the
management body.
The present guidelines do not contain provisions that are relate d to
potential capital add -ons.
It is self -evident that the needed controls and risk mitigation
measures should take into account the existin g risk factors and risk
levels.
GL amended

[Page 72]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
71
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
ESG factors in the risk
management framework
Generally, respondents do not find the proposal clear and
recommend either providing further clarification or
deleting.
The GL cannot replace the major work that is on its way in the area
of ESG risk factors. It is important that institutions take into accou nt
ESG risk factors and adjust their business model and risk appetite
where necessary . The GL were clarified to ensure that the
responsibility of the management body to ensure an appropriate
management of all risks, including risks driven b y ESG risk factors ,
are managed.
GL amended
Responses to questions in Consultation Paper EBA/CP/2020/20
Comments to the background section
Para. 14
Background and
rationale
Some respondents comment that the reference to
‘offshore financial centres ’ is not clearly defined.
Therefore, the GL should use a consistent and more legally
clear term such as ‘third country’, unless a distinction is
established between third countries and offshore financial
centres.
The GL reflect the wording within the CRD. Indeed, the application
of the CRD requirements outside the EU on a consolidated basis is
not different between ‘third countries ’ and ‘offshore financial
centres ’.
While international bodies, e.g. the IMF provide for a definition of
‘offshore financial centres ’, the CRD does not. It has been clarified
that there is no differentiation of the CRD requirements between
third countries and offshore financial centres.
GL amended
Para. 14-15
Background and
rationale
One respondent comment that the principle of
proportionality should also apply when applying the
guidelines on the consolidated basis. Therefore,
Paragraph 14 should specify as follows: ‘Under
Article 109(2) of Directive 2013/13/EU , these guidelines
apply on a sub -consolidated and consolidated basis by
taking into account the proportionality principle .’
Some respondents comment that ‘adequate’, added in
Paragraph 14 of the Legal Basis, is not in line with
The principle of proportionality is a general principle of law that also
applies to the EBA Guidelines . It entails, that all provisions are
applied in a proportionate way. It does not mean that certain
provisions may not be applied.
The wording of Paragraph 14 has been aligned with the CRD text.
GL amended

[Page 73]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
72
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Article 109 CRD V. One respondent suggests that ‘sound’,
‘solid’ or ‘similar’ may be better suited in the relevant
context.
Para. 19
Background and
rationale
One respondent suggests limiting the reference to the
EBA publication by type, as otherwise it would be too
broad.
The comment has been accommodated. Background
amended
Para. 21
Background and
rationale
A few respondents ask for clarification to which ‘bodies’
the guidelines refer. The background section has been clarified. GL amended
Para. 31
Background and
rationale
One respondent asks whether the renaming to ‘three lines
model’ by the Institute of Internal A uditors has a bearing
on these guidelines and the name of the ‘three lines of
defence ’ model. The IIA’s model allows the 1st and 2nd line
to be blended. This is quite a substantial difference
compared to these guidelines which clearly require the
independence of the control functions in credit
institutions. The respondent requests how the EBA will
take the IIA’s three lines model into consider ation.
Within institutions, the internal control functions must be
independent of the business they control in line with the CRD and
also international standards (e.g. BCBS).
There is no intention to deviate from this approach.
No change
Para. 33
Background and
rationale
One respondent asks for revision of the background
section as regards the compliance function’s scope of
responsibility is defined too broad and prescriptive. Even
though the compliance function is considered to be a
crucial funct ion for ensuring compliance with laws and
regulations, it should not be responsible for compliance
with all applicable laws and regulations but rather with
those related to the Compliance function as such.
The background section is clear and provides an o verview on the
internal organisation of the institution. The guidelines further
specify the CRD requirements.
It is deemed sufficiently clear, that the compliance function does
not carry all those responsibilities all on its own, but together with
the first line of defence and other functions (e.g. legal unit) within
the institution.
No change

[Page 74]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
73
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Para. 40
Background and
rationale
Some respondents suggest that this section should only
refer to loans and not to other transactions (CRD V
considers loans only).
See comments above under general comments. No change
Comments to the guidelines
Para. 14
Definitions
One respondent recommends to review the definitions and
operate with one set of definitions for the guidelines on
internal governance and the guidelines on fitness and
propriety (e.g. definition of staff, prudential consolidation).
The term ‘relevant institutions’ has been introduced in the
guidelines on fitness and propriety and makes it difficult to
further differentiate between the categories of institutions
that are now in scope (there are overall 6 categories:
‘institutions’, ‘CRD-institutions’, ‘relevant institutions’,
‘significant CRD -institutions’, ‘listed relevant institutions
and listed institutions’, ‘consolidating credit institutions’);
on the other side, the Internal Governance GL operates
with the terms ‘significant credit institutions’ and ‘listed
CRD credit institutions’.
The definitions within the guidelines have been reviewed and
aligned to the extent possible.
As the scope of application of the guidelines differs, it is necessary
to include additional definitions within the guidelines on fitness and
propriety. E.g. the term ‘relevant institution’ comprises institutions
subject to the CRD and investment firms, un less they are small and
not interconnected.
GL amended
Para. 7
Scope of application
One respondent suggests that the EBA considers how to
extend the scope to all financial services firms (e.g.
payment providers).
The EBA’s mandate is to provide guidance on the applicat ion of
requirements set out in directives and regulations within its scope
of action. The EBA does not have the power to extent the scope of
application of the CRD to other financial institutions.
No change
Para. 7
Scope of application
A few respondents asks for confirmation that the deletion
of the definition ‘institution’ and the use of the word ‘credit
institution’ is linked to the new IFR/IFD regulation and to
the new definition of credit institutions.
This was indeed the intention. Some investment firms will have to
apply for an authorisation under the CRD. The CRD continues to use
the term ‘institutions’ for all entities that are subject to the CRD.
The EBA will amend the guidelines accordingly. Howeve r, some
GL amended

[Page 75]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
74
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
investment firms are required via the IFD to apply the provisions of
Title VII of the CRD, this has been clarified in the guidelines.
Para. 15
Date of application
Several respondents suggest postponing the date of
application, taking into consideration the Covid -19
pandemic and the implementation date of the
whistleblower directive (17 December 2021) and that IT
system changes are needed to comply with the
requireme nts on related party loans and transactions.
One respondent ´points out that for investment firms that
are subject to the guidelines, it might be difficult to comply
with the new guidelines in a short period of time especially
in Member States where the local regulations on corporate
governance did not apply to them.
The effective coming into force of the amendments within the
guidelines has been set to 31.12.2021, take into account the time
needed for their implementation.
Investment firms that will have to apply for authorisation as credit
institution were subject to the previous EBA guidelines on internal
governance, that are now being updated.
Investment firms, unless small and not interconnected, are subject
to the IFD and apply the governance require ments as further
specified within the corresponding EBA guidelines under IFD. Small
and non -interconnected investment firms continue to apply the
governance requirements under Directive 2014/65/EU (MiFID) and
the Commissions Delegated Regulation (EU) 2017/ 584 on
organisational requirements.
GL amended
No change
Para. 17
Proportionality
One respondent raises that the section on the
proportionality principles differ between the two
guidelines.
The scope of application and subject matter of the guidelines on
internal governance and the guidelines on fitness and propriety
differ. Different factors to determine the proportionate applica tion
of the provisions have therefore a different relevance, while the
general principle is indeed the same. Some criteria have, however,
been aligned.
GL amended
Para. 19 and 84
Proportionality and
organisational
framework in a group
context
One respondent suggested a specific proportionality
regime for subsidiaries that are set up to develop and
accelerate technology and innovation businesses (e.g.
proprietary software and technology infrastructure,
payment services) to serve the Group’s bank s at arms -
length and suggest that those subsidiaries should not be
The CRD applies also on a consolidated basis. The scope of
prudential consolidation is specified within the CRR. The principle of
proportionality determines how requirements and provisions
within these guidelines are applied in a proportionate way. Creatin g
additional waivers within guidelines for certain firms in the scope of
No change

[Page 76]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
75
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
subject to the banks’ governance requir ements on a
consolidated basis.
prudential consolidation is not possible under the existing legal
framework.
Para. 19(m)
Proportionality
Regarding th e introduction of small and non -complex
institutions, some respondents recommend ed adding a
reference to the relevant CRR 2 provisions.
The comment has been accommodated. GL amended
Para. 19(m)
Proportionality
Some respondents asked to clarify that the proportionality
criteria could be considered even though the entity is
classified as a large institution.
All criteria are applied in parallel and do not limit the consideration
of other criteria. The guidelines do not contain any limi ts to the
proportionality principle, but the CRD contains specific provisions
with which large institutions must comply. I n some cases , the CRD
also established minimum requirements for all institutions. The
principle of proportionality also requires the largest and most
complex institutions to comply with the requirements in a more
sophisticated manner than is expected from average or sm all
institutions.
No change
Para. 21 and 22
Role and responsibility of
the management body
Some respondents proposed to (re)move the last sentence
of Paragraph 22 to Paragraph 21 since it would not only
refer to the management board in its supervisory function.
The wording has been clarified. GL amended
Question 2
Setting up of an AML/TF
control framework
Para. 23 and 32
Some respondents asked for clarification regarding the
upcoming EBA products in this area and suggested to wait
concerning the inclusion of AML in the guidelines until
other work on this topic has been completed and
recommend adding cross references.
Several respondents propose d the removal of all
references to the identification of a member of the
management board as respons ible for ensuring
compliance with the national implementation of AMLD on
the grounds of contradiction with certain national
The guidelines clarify that ML/TF risk factors are one of the factors
that are rele vant for the institution’s risk.
Moreover, the guidelines determine that a control function should
be responsible for monitoring AML/CTF compliance as part of the
robust governance arrangements.
The EBA’s work on AML/CTF is part of the overall working program,
available at: https://www.eba.europa.eu/about-us/wor k -
programme/current -work-programme
GL amended

[Page 77]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
76
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
corporate laws that, for instance, apply the principles of
collegiality and joint and several responsibility to the
management body (e.g., in one -tier board systems). They
also highlight that Article 46(4) AMLD, when setting ‘where
applicable’, leaves room for Member States to stipulate
otherwise, the topic still not being sufficiently harmonis ed.
In one -tier systems it could entail assigning that
responsibility to an executive director (e.g., the CEO, who
is in many instances the sole executive member within the
board ‘effectively directing the institution ’), and that would
put into question the in dependence and accountability
framework from internal cont rol functions envisaged in the
guidelines on internal governance. It would also be
impossible in a hybrid system where there is a CEO who can
be (but is not systemically) part of the board of directors.
Respondents find it is hard to see the rational e behind a
new accountability regime, applicable only to AML/CTF
issues, where responsibility would lie w ith a member of the
management body instead of with the corresponding
internal control head (accountable directly to the
management body as a whole).
A few respondents suggest merging Para. 23(c) and (d) to
avoid creating two parallel control frameworks.
Given the upcoming additional work, the guidelines have be en
revised to only include high -level principles r e the AML/CTF
compliance officer and compliance function and related
responsibilities at th e level of the management body.
Where the head of a control function is a member of the
management body, institutions should be mindful of any possible
conflicts of interests. The same applies when assigning
responsibilities regarding the AML/CTF function.
The allocation of such responsibilities to a member of the
management body does not reduce the overall responsibility of the
management body for this topic as prescribed in Art. 88 CRD.
Para. 23 and 32
Proportionality and role
and responsibility of the
management body
Reporting lines
Some respondents also find that ass igning the
responsibility to a member of the management body
contradicts Para. 155-156, which determine that the heads
of internal control functions should be directly accountable
to the management body and ‘be able to have access and
report directly to the management body in its supervisory
Also internal control functions could be headed by a member of the
management body. The approach regarding AML compliance is
consistent with the approa ch for other control functions.
All institutions have to have a management function and a
supervisory function within the management body. The governance
arrangements must be in line with this approach, hence, reporting
No change

[Page 78]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
77
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
function to raise concerns and warn the supervisory
function, where appropriate, when specific developments
affect or may affect the credit institution’.
Respondents point to difficulties to implement such
requirements in unitary board structures and find it
impossible in hybrid system, where there is a CEO who can
be (but is not systemically) part of the board of directors.
lines to the super visory function can always be established, even if
a control function is led by a member of the management b ody in
its management function.
According to the CRD all persons who direct the business (including
the CEO) are per definition part of the manageme nt body and the
respective CRD requirements.
Para. 23
Cross references
One respondent points to the changed references (due to
the new structure of the draft guidelines) in points k
(Section 8 instead of 9), l ( Section 9 instead of 10) and m
(Section 10 instead of 11) of Paragraph 23.
All cross references in the document have been reviewed and
where necessary corrected. GL amended
Question 3
Para. 24
role and responsibility of
the management body
Some respondents find that the guidelines are n ot
sufficiently clear and should either be expended or the
paragraphs should be removed as the responsibilities are
already covered in Para. 23.
A few responses add that ESG risks are not a separate risk
category. It is suggested to delete the last part of Para. 24
‘that takes into account all risks, including environmental,
social and governance risks’. One respondent asked for a
further explanation on the definition of a sustainable
business model.
One respondent asks for clarification why the guidelines
add a section on ESG and at the same time mention that
the EBA is dev eloping a separate work on ESG.
It is important to introduce a reference to ESG risk factors and for
other risk management purposes and to the responsibility on
institutions to take into account such factors and their impact on
relevant risk exposures created by the transition of the economy
and the risk of external events that could lead to losses, e.g. due to
climate change or natural disasters. Such risks need to be taken int o
account in the institutions business model.
Some additional clarity has been provided in a principle d manner to
not pre -empt upcoming work at European level and at the EBA.
GL amended
Question 4
ESG risks
Another respondent evidences that there is currently no
uniform definition of ESG risks and therefore suggests
replacing ‘environmental, social and governance risks ’ by
‘environmental, social and governance factors ’.
The wording has been reviewed and refer ence is made to ESG risk
factors. GL amended

[Page 79]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
78
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Para. 34
Formal independence
One respondent again questions the requirement of formal
independence. It would have no Level 1 basis, and would
be very difficult to comply with due to the governance
structure of cooperative banks , as management board
members are, by nature and statutory, or imposed by law ,
clients and shareholders. It would also be incompatible
with the fit and proper requirements such as experience,
especially to chair a committee.
This paragraph has not been consulted on, please refer to the
feedback provided to the previous version of these guidelines. No change
Para. 43: setting up
committees – AML
committee
One respondent asks for more guidance on the suggest ion
to establish a committee, e.g. AML/CTF. Indications would
be useful as to the size at which it would make sense to
establish such a committee.
The establishment of such a committee is a possibility for
institutions to ensure robust governance arran gements, but not a
general regulatory requirement. While some institutions may deal
with this topic in the risk committee, others may prefer to establish
a separate committee.
No change
Para. 61
Committee’s process
One respondent asks to clarify that the factors listed
(including the new reference to AML/CFT compliance)
should be read as each applicable to one or both (but not
necessarily both) committees ( risk and nomination
committee).
Since AML/CTF information can be strictly confidential
(especially suspicious activity reports (SARs)) one
respondent recommends deleting the wording ‘including
AML/CTF compliance ’ in order to avoid conflicting
regulatory requirements. At least, if the proposal is not
accepted, it is suggested to add the exclusion of SARs from
the information access of the committees.
The guidelines apply to both committees when they are established .
The committees need to receive information that is relevant for
their work . A s part of this they also need to receive some
aggregated information on the frequency of SARs (risk committee).
The guidelines have been c larified that no individual SARs should be
submitted.
GL amended
Question 4
Para. 84
A few respondents request adding a definition of ‘offshore
financial centres ’ and to clarify if this notion leads to
The wording ‘offshore financial centres ’ repeats the wording used
in Article 109 of the CRD. The use of this term in the guidelines does
not lead to a differentiation of the CRD requirements between such
No change

[Page 80]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
79
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Organisational
framework in a group
context
different requirements regarding the ex pected governance
arrangements.
centres and other th ird countries and theref ore no definition is
necessary.
Question 4
Para. 84
One respondent asks why ‘on a consolidated and sub-
consolidated basis’ is mentioned whereas Article 109(2)
CRD IV mentions ‘on a consolidated or sub-consolidated
basis’.
The comment has been accommodated. GL amended
(former) Section 8:
Outsourcing Policy
Some respondents noted that the removal of the (former)
Section 8 would require additional cross-checking since the
guidelines on outsourcing arr angements make several
references to these guidelines.
A section on outsourcing policies has been added to the guidelines. GL amended
Para. 92: risk culture
Some respondents state that the ‘righteous culture’ is not
sufficiently clear ly defined . One respondent added that it
would include judgmental elements that might not fit to a
culture, but rather to preventive and corrective structures
and processes.
The guidelines have been clarified, the intention is to ensure that
the risk culture is not only lawful and consistent with the
institutions’ risk appetite, but also in line with the values that are
expected to be met by a diligent bank , e.g. in the context of
implementing and applying the AML/CTF framework.
GL amended
Question 5
Para. 98 and 9 9: general
comment
Some respondents recommend these paragraphs be
deleted for lack of a legal basis and argue that these
paragraphs are outside the scope of the CRD, which only
requires a gender -neutral remuneration policy and does
not include additional requirements for other areas within
the institution in the field of anti -discrimination or equal
opportunities.
Moreover, several dispositions of regional , national and EU
law (e.g., European Charter) already provide for obligations
to establish no-discrimination policies and in particular
anti-gender discrimination policies.
Article 74 CRD requires that institutions have robust governance
arrangements. It is part of the EBA’s role to take into account such
principles when setting out guidelines. Robust governance
arrangements should ensure that the principles set regarding non -
discrimination and equal opportunities in the TFEU, European
convention on human rights and the Europ ean Charter of
fundamental rights (e.g. Article 21 and 23) are met. Member State s
should have implemented such requirements in line with
Directive 2006/54/EC on equal opportunities.
Institutions should ensure compliance with such principles. Where
institutions already have policies in place under national law, that
GL amended

[Page 81]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
80
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
A few other respondents support the approach or even ask
that further details be provided and ask to fully align the
principle with the text of the European Charter of
Fundamental Rights (e.g. re the terms birth and origin).
are in line with the EBA’s Guidelines, no further implementation
burden would exist.
It is not necessary to have one single document containing all the
measures taken, but institutions must be ab le to demonstrate that
they have ensured that there is no discrimination in the meaning of
the guidelines.
Institutions should actively aim at increasing the pool of suitable
candidates for positions within the management body. By
improving the gender bal ance in positions directly below the
management body, institutions will be able to better take into
account gender diversity when recruiting members of the
management body (see also Art. 91 CRD).
The guidelines have been revised and fully aligned with the
European Charter of Fundamental Rights.
Question 6
Corporate values and
code of conduct – tax
offences – illicit dividend
arbitrage schemes
Para. 101(c)
Several respondents suggest deleting the provision on tax
offences, but in particular o n dividend arbitrage schemes,
deeming it unnecessary, too vague and not appropriate to
specifically point out to one particular kind of tax evasion
scheme. The word ‘illicit’ is not sufficiently clear.
Alternatively, it was suggested by some respondents to
limit this provision to cases where a court decision or a
decision from the AML/CFT supervisor has been issued or
where the competent authority have found a par ticular
practice to be illicit.
One respondent asks for clarification of the obligation on
banks to prevent tax crimes.
The amendment of the guidelines is necessary to stress that tax
offences are a relevant factor that should be considered withi n the
code of conduct.
The term ‘illicit’ covers schemes that are unlawful or are banned ;
the wording has been clarified.
Institutions have no active role in prosecuting clients for committing
tax crimes, but , as part of money laundering controls, institutions
must have appropriate controls to pr event them being used by
customers for money laundering, including the use of funds derived
from tax offences, purposes.
GL amended

[Page 82]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
81
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Para. 106 and Para. 126:
documentation of
conflicts of interest
Some respondents urge the need for more proportionality,
deeming that a detailed documentation and measures
should not be required for every minor or merely
theoretical conflict of interest. Suggestion to clarify as
follows: ‘If a notable conflict of interest is identified’.
The guidelines in Para. 106 have been clarified, in some cases minor
conflicts of interest may be accepted without specific measures
taken. COI should still be documented. The awareness of such
conflicts should already be a sufficient control measure in some
cases an d the controls in place can in such cases be considered as
sufficient.
GL amended
Question 7. Section 11 has been added to provide guidelines on loans and transactions with members of the management body and their related parti es, reflecting change s
to the CRD. Is the section appropriate and sufficiently clear?
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
management body and
their related parties
Legal basis
Most respondents raised that there is a lack of legal basis
to extend the provisions to other transactions, observing
that the CRD V does not provide for the setting up of a
monitoring framework or approval process or limits to
transactions with members of the management body and
their rel ated parties. Moreover, the scope of other
transactions is very wide and would lead to excessive
burden.
The guidelines have been revised to provide guidance on the
documentation on related party loans and the management of
conflicts of interest in relation to loans and transactions with
members of the management body and related parties. For both,
Article 88 CRD and Article 16 EBA founding regulation provide for a
clear legal basis.
While there is an obligation on institutions to be able to submit
certain information under Art . 88 CRD to their competent authority
and there is a definition of related parties, the guidelines do not
foresee a limitation of loans or transactions, but the consultation
paper (CP) foresee s that institutions should set limits in their policy,
which could be overruled by the management body.
The guidelines have been reworded to make clear that there should
be thresholds that trigger decision -making at the level of the
management body.
GL amended
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
The requirement to make available annually to
shareholders appropriate aggregated information is
criticised for lacking a legal basis in the CRD.
Institutions are subject to the provisions within the CRD, MiFID and
when listed the SRD .
All of the requirem ents need to be complied with at the same time.
The EBA is aware that national laws exist that transpose those EU
GL amended

[Page 83]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
82
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
management body and
their related parties
Relation to shareholder
rights directive (SRD) and
national law
Some respondents find the proposed provisions
disproportionate, as they are even stricter than the rules
provided for in SRD. Moreover, listed credit institution s
would be subject to two different and complex regimes for
related party transactions, leading to unreasonable
administrative burden and costs. Overlaps are also
highlighted with IAS24 disclosure requirements.
According to SRD only material related party transactions
are subject to approval and disclosure requirements and
the SRD provides for several exemptions (e.g. for
subsidiaries).
Additionally, several respondents highlight possible
overlapping with national requirements that already
provide for related parties transactions.
Directives. The EBA guidelines aim to achieve a harmonised
application of the provisions in the EU that are wi thin the EBA’s
scope of action.
The gu idelines have been revised and aligned with the CRD
requirements, without providing guidelines on requirements under
the SRD with which some institutions have to comply.
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
management body and
their related parties
Overlap with existing
control framework and
compliance costs
A few respondents point to overlaps with the existing
control frameworks that aim to control similar risks and
propose to take a more flexible approach.
Some respondents also observe that this section would
impose new compliance costs on credit institutions (e.g.,
review of procedures and IT systems) at a very inopportune
moment (i.e., COVID-19 crisis). Confidentiality/Data
protection issues have also been raised.
The provisions in the guidelines on related party loans and
transactions are a specific form of measures to manage conflicts of
interests. The obligation to manage such conflicts is part of the CRD
and while the EBA has identified some additional costs for the
implementation of the CRD provisions, the guidelines specify those
provisions and those additional elements add only very limited to
the costs created by the CRD provisions.
Institutions document all loans and transactions ; while this contains
personal data, this is a normal and necessary business practice. The
GL have been revised to reduce the documentation burden.
GL amended
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
With regard to banking groups, a few respondents suggest
clarifying that this section is not applicable to loans granted
to board members of other group entities, being only
The relevant provisions within the CRD apply on an individual and
consolidated basis. The guidelines have been clarified.
E.g. loans by the consolidated institution to a member of the
management body of a subsidiary, that does not fall under the
GL amended

[Page 84]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
83
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
management body and
their related parties
Application on a
consolidated level
addressed to loans made by the parent bank to its own
board members and their related parties.
On the issue of intra-group transactions, a few respondents
suggest, in line with Para. 116, to clarify that situations in
which there is no conflict of interest, although loans or
transactions are performed with a ‘related party’ as per the
definition of Article 88(1) CRD, such loans or transactions
can be excluded from additional requirements. The
proposed exclusion would apply, for instance, to
transactions with (i) the sole shareholder; (ii) subsidiaries
or (iii) commercial entities (corporate banking) including,
for example, companies where a close family member
holds a senior management position or has a share of 10%;
or entities where the board member has no influence (for
example where the board member holds a non -executive
directorship and where decisions are taken collectively);
(iv) shareholders and companies on which the credit
institution exerts control or significant influence; (v) the
shareholder of the credit institution who is represented in
the supervisory function of the management body by its
managing director or a person with a senior management
position; (vi) the management board member who holds a
supervisory board function in a subsidiary.
definition of a related party at the consolidated level, are not
considered to be related party loans. However, loans by the
subsidiary to the members of its management body a re related
party loans, even if they were subsidiaries within a group and
additional controls are applied on a group level.
The proposed exclusions have not been included in the guidelines
with regard to the documentation to related party loans, as
otherwise there would not be a record of the assessment of
conflicts of interest and no possibility for further follow ups if the
situation changes, nor the possibility to provide aggregated data.
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
management body and
their related parties
With regard to the application in cooperative credit
institutions, some respondents find the requirements
inappropriate, because in these banks directors are by
definition clients.
Therefore, it would become very difficult to find clients
who accept to become involved i n the management body
The requirements regarding related party loans are encoded within
the CRD. They apply also to cooperative banks.
Article 88 CRD requires all in stitutions to manage conflicts of
interest. All those requirements apply also to cooperative banks.
No change

[Page 85]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
84
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Application in
cooperative banks
if their (and those of their related parties) requests for
loans would have to be limited.
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
management body and
their related parties
Materiality threshold
Some respondents suggest furthe r specifying that only
loans that are material and have been concluded under
better conditions than standard conditions be subject to
increased document ation or approval requirements.
Some other respondents observe that the GL do not clearly
set a material ity threshold and, therefore, since a
materiality threshold could already be in place in the
national legal frameworks, they suggest that the GL refer
to national laws.
The provisions within the CRD apply to all related party loans. The
guideline s follow this approach and alread y foresee a
differentiation between material and non -material loans .
The GL aim to harmonise the application in all Member States . T his
cannot be achieved by references to national law.
It should be noted that the GL already indicated a threshold that
aimed at reducing the burden for supervisors and institutions
regarding the review of such loans.
For the management of conflict of interest , additional guidelines
have been p rovided that take into account the materiality of such
loans and transactions. The materiality threshold has to be set by
institutions.
The guideline s have been reviewed and clarified to reduce the
burden for institutions with regard to non -material loans and
transactions.
GL amended
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
management body and
their related parties
Supervisory reporting
With regard to the requirement to make available, without
undue delay, the documentation to competent authorities,
several respondents suggest deleting it because it is
excessively burdensome and difficult to implement for
complex loans.
Institutions must comply with all requirements under the CRD and
the CRR and it must be possible to exercise effective supervision.
The term ‘undue delay’ already allows for the needed flexibility and
reflects the provision within Article 88 CRD with regard to related
party loans.
Given other revisions to this section, the additional burden created
appears to be acceptable and is mainly caused by the provision
within the CRD.
No change

[Page 86]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
85
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
management body and
their related parties
Disclosure and reporting
to shareholders
Some respondents raise confidentiality/data protection
issues; others evidence possible conflicts with some
national legal frameworks.
Moreover, it would be problematic to require cooperati ve
banks to disclose aggregated information as the
management body members might be well known at the
regional level.
Disclosure requirements already exist under the CRR and under
IAS24. The guideline s have been revised to ensure that they are fully
in lin e with the legal requirements under the CRD and CRR ; in
particular, some disclosure and reporting requirements to
shareholders have been removed or revised. The publication of
aggregated information as required under the CRR should not raise
concerns under data protection requirements.
GL amended
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
management body and
their related parties
Additional related parties
With regard to the possibility to allow credit institutions to
identify additional categories of related parties, some
respondents complain that the GL ad opt an inconsistent
approach since, on the one side, they remove flexibility in
the procedure to be adopted as w ell as the possibility to
utilise the existing frameworks and, on the other side, they
leave flexibility on the scope of related parties, which is
defined in great detail in the CRD V.
The guideline s follow the approach taken in the CRD, but leaves it
to institutions to apply, if they deem it necessary, to extend the
scope of related parties. This could e.g. be necessary where
required under natio nal law. The text has been clarified.
GL amended
Section 11, related party
loans and transactions
Some respondents raise confidentiality/data protection
issues and the right to informational self -determination of
the relatives concerned.
They note that a mandatory notification from a circle of
related parties enlarged by parents and grown -up children
presumes that there is in fact legal authority for the legally -
binding collection of data by a member of the management
body, otherwise the management body
member/institution bears the objective risk that relevant
data, e.g., from his/her majority aged children or parents,
cannot be obtained in their entirety. From a purely factual
standpoint, this then raises the question whether a nearly
complete establishmen t and ongoing updating of the
The declaration of members of the management body of their
conflicts of interests with regard to loans to related parties and
other transactions is a part of the measures necessary to manage
conflicts of interest and to ensure objective decision -making
regarding such loans and transactions.
Institutions in any case keep data on loans and transa ctions.
Marking loans, as related party loan is an additional element that is
necessary to comply with the requirement under the CRD.
The provisions have been revised and specified to reduce the
regulatory burden. However, the identification of related parties is
necessary to comply with the requirements under Art. 88 CRD.
GL amended

[Page 87]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
86
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
shareholding/ownership structure of each institution is
even possible.
Related party loans and
transactions
Single respondents suggest enriching the section by
including (i) additional guidelines or limits for secured vs.
unsecured credit exposure extended to insiders; (ii) annual
submission of the related interest attestation from the
members containing a list of all organisations in which they
have regulatory significant interest in or are in a position to
make or influence significant business de cisions or
impacting financial profitability of the related company.
Several respondents suggest further specifying that only
loans that are classified as material and have been
concluded under better conditions than standard
conditions are subject to incr eased documentation or
approval requirements .
All loans to related parties must be documented and submitted to
the competent authority ( CA) upon request, regardless whether
they are secured or not. Also decisions on secured loans should not
be taken by staff that has material conflicts of interest.
Institutions have to manage conflicts of interests ; as part of this they
may require annual declarations, however, as a general obligation
this would be too burdensome.
No change
Para. 107 to 109
One responde nt suggests carefully reviewing the wording
for consistency , for instance, the terms ‘framework’,
‘decision ’, and ‘procedure ’ are used frequently in different
contexts (mainly Para. 107, 108 and 109) and to provide
further guidance on the elements expected that should be
specified in the related party framework, e.g., a decision -
making process (including approvals), internal procedures,
policies.
The guidelines are considered sufficie ntly clear and have not been
changed compared to the guideline s in force. No change
Para. 107 – arm’s length
conditions
Some respondents claim that there is no legal basis to
prescribe arm’s length conditions for private -law
agreements in general. The wording should be clarified as
follows: ‘Such a framework should include limits for loans
and transactions (e.g. per product type) and ensure that
The arm's length principle is the condition that the parties of a
transaction are independent and on an equal footing, which leads
usually to conditions that are fair for all concerned parties, including
the institution’s shareholders. Where transactions are not
conducted under market conditions, the inappropriate
GL amended

[Page 88]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
87
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
they are either conducted at arm’s length or deviations are
documented .’ Another respondent felt that the restriction
to ‘conditions available to staff’ is not necessary.
management of conflicts of interest might be the reason for such
decisions.
However, it is accepted that special conditions are provided to staff.
There are however some limits in na tional law that must be
considered. The guidelines have been clarified.
Para. 107: content of the
framework – loans fair
from the perspective of
the shareholders or
owners
As for the distinction between the transactions carried out
on normal market terms and the transactions which are
considered fair and reasonable from the perspective of the
institution and of the shareholders, it is suggested to limit
the assessment to the perspective of the institution, taking
into account its safe a nd sound management. Therefore,
the assessment should not be extended to the interests of
the shareholders or owners of the bank.
The institution is owned by shareholders or equity holders and
therefore they need to be considered when assessing conflicts o f
interest.
No change
Para. 108: decision on
material loans – approval
by the management
body
Some respondents seek further clarification deeming
unclear when a person is considered ‘personally concerned
by a loan to or transaction with a member of the
management body or their related parties’. They suggest
clarifying that a loan granted to a commercial entity, which
is a related party to a management body member, does not
automatically result in the qualification of that
management body member as ‘personally concerned ’ (in
its personal interests).
The guidelines have been clarified, the person concerned is the
person who, because of the relation to a party, actually or
potentially has a conflict of interest and should therefore not
influence the specific decision made.
GL amended
Para. 112: data on loans
to be documented
Some respondents suggest that the identification of the
details on the loans to be provided should be left to entities
in accordance with local regulations and internal
procedures: the day -to-day IT management of credits and
the associated risks is the cor e business of banks and the
EBA should not interfere in this field. In particular, this
Institutions d ocument each and every contract they have. For all
related party loans, institutions must ensure that they can provide
competent authorities with the information requested regarding
related party loans. The gui delines specify this provision.
Moreover, comp etent authorities must also be able to effectively
supervise institutions, including , e.g. the management of conflicts
GL amended

[Page 89]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
88
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
paragraph 112 does not make any difference between the
type of loans and as such is much too broad. Others view
that the requirements are too extensive.
of interest that is required under Article 88(1) CRD. The guidelines
have been revised and clarified.
Para. 112 (d) and (g)
Loans and other
transactions with
members of the
management body and
their related parties
The GL do not define how to calculate the EUR 200 000
threshold; one respondent requests indications on how to
calculate the threshold of loans (e.g., shoul d all respective
transactions related to a member of the management body
and their related parties be taken jointly into consideration
or should each transa ction be examined separately?).
Some respondents ask to clarify how data should be
aggregated.
The guidelines have been clarified. GL amended
Question 8. Paragraph 126 has been added, is it sufficiently clear?
Para. 126 Documentation of conflicts of interest – see Para. 106. Please refer to comments ( Para. 106) above.
Para. 129: Internal alert
procedures - protection
of persons who report
breaches of Union law
One respondent suggests deleting the added last sentence
deeming questionable whether there is any added value to
insert a requirement to ensure that credit institutions are
compliant with national law in one certain aspect.
While institutions have to comply with national law, this additional
aspect, that has been introduced only recently, has been retained
in the guideline s for the sake of completeness.
No change
Question 9
Para. 140 and 149: ML/FT
risks in the internal
control framework –
general comment
Several respondents deem that more proportionality is
needed regarding the measures to mitigate operational
and reputational risks arising from ML/TF risk factors. The
risks caus ed depend on the nature and complexity of
individual business activities. This should be clarified as
follows: ‘and take mitigating measures to reduce those
risks as well as, where relevant, their operational and
reputational risks linked to them .’
All banks are exposed to such risks, but to a different level. They
need to be identified and should form part of the holistic view on all
risks. However, not every risk needs to be mitigated. Mea sures
should be taken on a risk -based approach. Paragraph 140 has been
clarified.
GL amended

[Page 90]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
89
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
AML training
One respondent suggests, in the phrasing of the last
paragraph concerning staff, to expand to continuous
efforts by companies, i.e., ´ Credit institutions should take
continuous measures to ensure that their staff is made
aware (…) ´.
The guidelines already contain that staff should receive the
necessary training on a regular basis. No change
AML/TF risk factors
One respondent asks if the credit institution should take
into account any criteria other than those pu blished by the
Commission for the assessment of ML/TF risks . Does the
EBA have any additional expectations from the credit
institutions apart from the compulsory training of their
staff?
The EBA has issued guidelines on ML/TF risk factors that should be
taken into account. The EBA is going to publish guidelines on the
AML/CTF compliance function. All institutions need to comply with
the framework set under AMLD, including any delegated
regulations, etc.
No change
AML committee
One respondent observes that compliance with AML/CFT
regulations should be ensured through adequate and
effective internal management structures and appropriate
control mechanisms. For this, banks could also form an
AML/CFT committee.
Institutions can set up an AML committee. However, one person has
to be responsible for AML/CTF compliance. No change
Para. 143: Implementing
an internal control
framework
(and Para. 166 internal
control functions)
Some respondents sugg est clarifying which ‘other’
compliance functions are referred to. Some of them ask for
clarification that the reference to compliance may be
covered by a separate Anti -Financial Crime (AFC) function,
if this exists within an organisation. Consequently it is
suggested including eithe r AFC in the definition of
‘compliance’ or in a second sentence before internal audit
in Para. 166. One of the respondents asks if AML/TF shall
be a separate control function.
The guidelines do not aim at requiri ng additional control functions,
but allow for them to be installed by the institution. It is not
uncommon that larger institutions have separate control functions
that are, as a second line of defence , responsible for overseeing and
managing AML risks. In stitutions e.g. may also have a separate
function for information security risks. However, the guidelines
leave it to institutions to set up additional control functions,
determine their scope of action and label them.
No change

[Page 91]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
90
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Para. 164: New products
and significant changes –
ML/CF associated risks
One respondent observes that the requirement to take
ML/TF risks into account in new -product processes is
superfluous since it is already the subject of European
supervisory regulations/circulars.
The inclusion in the guidelines aims at raising the awareness on this
important risk factor, its assessment and documentation, including
in the new product approval process.
No change
Para. 166: AML/CFT in
internal control functions
– general comment
Some respondents ask for clarification on whether the
control functions are supposed to cover new/additional
tasks or if AML/CTF aspects shall be integrated into the
respective department. On this, one respondent suggests
stating that the AML/CFT compliance should be ensured by
the compliance department or another department. See
also comments under Para. 143.
The same as with all risks, ML/TF risks are managed by the first line
of defence and the second line of defence, which ensures the
compliance with AML/CTF related provision and oversees and
supports the first line of defence. Institutions may set up an
AML/CTF compliance function or integrate it into the compliance
function. The guideline s have been clarified.
GL amended
Para. 208: Compliance
function - fraud, ML/TF
or other financial crime
One respondent suggests deleting the part of sentence
‘ML/TF or other financial crime’, as this is the responsibility
of the AML Department and any overlaps in responsibilities
or tasks with the Compliance Department, which belongs
to the same line of defence , must be avoided.
While institutions may have an independent AML department,
other institutions may have this function perfor med by the
compliance function.
The AML/CTF compliance function should be independent from the
business it controls. Also the business has to implemen t appropriate
AML/CTF controls.
No change
Para. 210 – 220: Internal
audit function
One respondent highlights that internal audit is more and
more assessing outsourced activities as banks outsource
more and more operations; therefore, it suggests to
explicitly mention that ‘Every activity (including
outsourced activities) and every entity of the bank should
fall within the overall scope of the internal audit function .’
All activities and functions of the institution are within the audit
universe. This does not change when activities or functions are
outsourced. This principle is encoded wi thin the EBA Guideline s on
outsourcing.
No change
Para. 223: Business
continuity management -
HR
Some respondents suggest that ‘c ore human resources’
should refer to ‘core staff/employees’ so it is clear that it
does not refer to HR department.
The comment has been accommodated. GL amended

[Page 92]
FINAL REPORT ON GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
91
Comments Summary of responses received The EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Para. 224: Business
continuity management
plan
One respondent deems unclear how the inclusion of the
word ‘drivers’ changes the intended meaning of this
requirement.
The additional wording clarifies that instituti ons should also look
into the risk factors (drivers) that can lead to severe business
disruptions.
GL amended

[Page 93]
FINAL REPORT EBA GUIDELINES ON INTERNAL GOVERNANCE
92