[Page 1]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND
SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
EBA/GL/2022/03
18 March 2022
Final Report
Guidelines on common procedures and methodologies for the supervisory review and evaluation
process (SREP) and supervisory stress testing under Directive 2013/36/EU

[Page 2]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
2
Contents
Executive summary 6
Background and rationale 8
Guidelines 16
Compliance and reporting obligations 18
Status of these guidelines 18
Reporting requirements 18
Subject matter, definitions, level of application and implementation 19
1.1. Subject matter 19
1.2. Definitions 19
1.3. Level of application 23
1.4. Date of application 24
1.5. Repeal 24
The common SREP 25
2.1. Overview of the common SREP framework 25
2.2 Scoring in the SREP 29
2.2.1 Risk scores 29
2.2.2 Viability scores including an overall SREP score 30
2.3 Organisational arrangements 31
2.4 Proportionality and supervisory engagement 32
2.4.1 Category 1 institutions 33
2.4.2 Category 2 institutions 33
2.4.3 Category 3 institutions 33
2.4.4 Category 4 institutions 34
2.4.5 Minimum requirements for supervisory engagement 34
2.4.6 Focus and granularity of the assessment 36
Monitoring of key indicators 37
Business model analysis 39
4.1 General considerations 39
4.2 Preliminary assessment 41
4.3 Identifying the areas of focus for the BMA 42
4.4 Assessing the business environment 42
4.5 Analysis of the current business model 43
4.5.1 Quantitative analysis 43
4.5.2 Qualitative analysis 44
4.6 Analysis of the strategy and financial plans 45
4.7 Assessing business model viability 45

[Page 3]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
3
4.8 Assessing the sustainability of the institution’s strategy 46
4.9 Identification of key vulnerabilities 47
4.10 Summary of findings and scoring 47
Assessing internal governance and institution-wide controls 50
5.1 General considerations 50
5.2 Overall internal governance framework 51
5.3 Organisation and functioning of the management body 52
5.4 Corporate values and risk culture 53
5.5 Remuneration policies and practices 54
5.6 Internal control framework 55
5.7 Risk management framework 58
5.7.1 Risk appetite framework and strategy 59
5.7.2 ICAAP and ILAAP frameworks 59
5.7.3 Assessment of institutions’ stress testing 62
5.7.4 New products and significant changes 66
5.8 Information and communication technologies and business continuity management 66
Assessing risks to capital 74
6.1 General considerations 74
6.2 Assessment of credit and counterparty risk 76
6.2.1 General considerations 76
6.2.2 Assessment of inherent credit risk 77
6.2.3 Assessment of credit risk management and controls 88
6.2.4 Summary of findings and scoring 95
6.3 Assessment of market risk 97
6.3.1 General considerations 97
6.3.2 Assessment of inherent market risk 98
6.3.3 Assessment of market risk management and controls 101
6.3.4 Summary of findings and scoring 107
6.4 Assessment of operational risk 109
6.4.1 General considerations 109
6.4.2 Assessment of inherent operational risk 110
6.4.3 Assessment of reputational risk 116
6.4.4 Assessment of operational risk management, measurement and controls 118
6.4.5 Summary of findings and scoring 124
6.5 Assessment of interest rate risk arising from non-trading book activities 126
6.5.1 General considerations 126
6.5.2 Assessment of inherent IRRBB 127
6.5.3 Assessment of IRRBB management and controls (both risk management and
compliance, and internal audit control functions) 131
6.5.4 Summary of findings and scoring 136
SREP capital assessment 139

[Page 4]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
4
7.1 General considerations 139
7.2 Determining additional own funds requirements for risks other than the risk of excessive
leverage 140
7.2.1 Determining additional own funds to cover unexpected losses 140
7.2.2 Determining own funds or other measures to cover model deficiencies 144
7.2.3 Determining own funds or other measures to cover other deficiencies 145
7.2.4 Determining the composition of additional own funds requirements 145
7.3 Additional own funds requirements for the risk of excessive leverage 145
7.3.1 Assessment of risk of excessive leverage 146
7.3.2 Determination of additional own funds requirement to address the risk of excessive
leverage 147
7.3.3 Composition of additional own funds requirement to address the risk of excessive
leverage 148
7.4 Reconciliation with the capital buffers and any macroprudential requirements 148
7.5 Determining the TSCR, TSLRR, OCR and OLRR 148
7.6 Articulation and justification of own funds requirements 150
7.7 Meeting requirements in stressed conditions 152
7.7.1 Using P2G to address the quantitative outcomes of stress testing 153
7.7.2 Capital planning and other supervisory measures to address capital adequacy in
stressed conditions 157
7.8 Summary of findings and scoring 158
Assessing risks to liquidity and funding 161
8.1 General considerations 161
8.2 Assessing liquidity risk 163
8.3 Assessing inherent funding risk 167
8.4 Assessing liquidity and funding risk management 171
8.5 Summary of findings and scoring 182
SREP liquidity assessment 186
9.1 General considerations 186
9.2 Overall assessment of liquidity 186
9.3 Determining the need for specific liquidity requirements 188
9.4 Determination of specific quantitative liquidity requirements 188
9.5 Articulation of specific quantitative liquidity requirements 192
9.6 Summary of findings and scoring 194
Overall SREP assessment and application of supervisory measures 197
10.1 General considerations 197
10.2 Overall SREP assessment 198
10.3 Application of capital measures 201
10.4 Application of liquidity measures 202
10.5 Application of other supervisory measures 202

[Page 5]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
5
10.6 Supervisory reaction to a situation where TSCR or OCR is not met 211
10.7 Supervisory reaction to a situation where P2G is not met 211
10.8 Interaction between supervisory and early intervention measures 213
10.9 Interaction between supervisory and macroprudential measures 213
10.10 Interaction between supervisory and AML/CFT measures 213
Application of the SREP to cross-border groups 215
11.1 Application of the SREP to cross-border groups 215
11.2 SREP capital assessment and institution-specific prudential requirements 217
11.3 SREP liquidity assessment and institution-specific prudential requirements 219
11.4 Application of other supervisory measures 219
Supervisory stress testing 221
12.1 Use of supervisory stress testing by competent authorities 221
12.2 Key elements of supervisory stress testing 222
12.3 Organisational and governance arrangements within competent authorities 223
12.4 Process and methodological considerations 225
Annexes 227
Annex 1. Operational risk, examples of the link between losses and risk drivers 227
Annex 2. Key features and differences between P2R and P2G 228
Accompanying documents 230
1.1 Draft cost-benefit analysis / impact assessment 230
I. Introduction 230
II. Policy objectives 230
III. Baseline scenario 231
IV. Options considered 231
V. Impact assessment (data collection) 237
1.2 Feedback on the public consultation and on the opinion of the BSG 244

[Page 6]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
6
Executive summary
These guidelines, drawn up pursuant to Article 107(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU, are addressed to
competent authorities and are intended to promote common procedures and methodologies for
the supervisory review and evaluation process (SREP), which is an ongoing supervisory process
bringing together findings from all supervisory activities into a comprehensive supervisory overview
of an institution. These guidelines also aim to achieve convergence of practices followed by
competent authorities in supervisory stress testing across the EU in accordance with Article 100 of
Directive 2013/36/EU.
The EBA has developed these revised SREP Guidelines in order to implement the changes brought
by Directive (EU) 2019/878 amending Directive 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) 2019/876
amending Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. The revision of the S REP Guidelines, while keeping the
original framework with the main SREP elements intact, reflects the amendments at Level 1, which
include, among other things, the introduction of the assessment of the risk of excessive leverage
and the revision of the methodology for the determination of the Pillar-2 Guidance. This revision is
also aimed at aligning the text with other relevant guidelines, technical standards , as well as
enhancing the guidance by incorporating identified best practices. Additional relevant changes are
related to the enhancement of the principle of proportionality as well as the encouragement of
cooperation among prudential supervisory authorities and AML/CFT supervisors, as well as
resolution authorities.
The common SREP framework presented in these guidelines is built on:
a. business model analysis;
b. assessment of internal governance arrangements and institution-wide controls;
c. assessment of risks to capital and adequacy of capital to cover these risks; and
d. assessment of risks to liquidity and adequacy of liquidity resources to cover these
risks.
Regular monitoring of key indicators is used to identify material changes in the risk profile and to
support the SREP framework. The specific elements of the SREP framework are assessed and scored
on a scale of 1 to 4. The outcome of the assessments, both individually and considered as a whole,
forms the basis for the overall SREP assessment, which represents the up-to-date supervisory view
of the institution ’s overall viability. It should also form the b asis for supervisory measures and
dialogue with the institution.
These guidelines make a link between ongoing supervision, as addressed in Directive 2013/36/EU,
and determining whether the institution is ‘failing or likely to fail ’, as addressed in Directi ve
2014/59/EU. This is through the SREP assessment of the institution’s viability, as measured by the
overall SREP assessment and the overall SREP score. The overall SREP score has four positive grades
to be applied to viable institutions (1 to 4) and one negative grade (‘F’) indicating that the

[Page 7]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
7
competent authority has determined that the institution is ‘failing or likely to fail ’ within the
meaning of Article 32 of Directive 2014/59/EU, which activates the procedure for interaction with
resolution authorities stipulated in that Article.
These guidelines recognise the principle of proportionality by:
a. categorising institutions in four distinct categories according to their systemic
importance and the extent of any cross-border activities;
b. building a minimum supervisory engagement model, where the frequency, depth
and intensity of the assessments vary depending on the category of the institution;
and
c. providing further clarifications on the application of the proportionality principle in
the context of the assessment of some specific sources of risks.
The minimum engagement model also helps to structure the dialogue with institutions to assess
the individual SREP elements and the overall SREP assessment.
These revised guidelines are issued to update the latest version of the Guidelines, whose provisions
will be repealed and replaced by these guidelines.
Next steps
The guidelines will be translated into the official EU languages and published on the EBA website.
The deadline for competent authorities to report whether they comply with the guidelines will be
2 months after the publication of the translations. The guidelines will apply from 1 January 2023.

[Page 8]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
8
Background and rationale
The EBA is mandated to foster sound and effective supervision and to drive supervisory
convergence across the EU arising from the requirements specified in Directive 2013/36/EU (CRD)
and more generally from its obligations under its founding regulation. The Supervisory Review and
Evaluation Process (SREP) is one of the main tools for supervision, through which competent
authorities form a comprehensive view on the risk profile of the institu tions, as well as on their
overall viability and sustainability, and may impose adequate supervisory measures to ensure
material risks are properly addressed.
Article 107 of the CRD mandates the EBA to draft guidelines for competent authorities, specifying
the common procedures and methodologies for the SREP and for the assessment of the
organisation and treatment of risks referred to in Articles 76 to 87 of the CDR, in a manner that is
appropriate to the size, structure and internal organisation of institu tions, and the nature, scope,
and complexity of their activities. Additionally, Article 100(2) of the CRD empowers the EBA to issue
guidelines to ensure that common methodologies are used by competent authorities when
conducting annual supervisory stress t ests for SREP purposes. Based on that mandate, the EBA’s
primary objective for the guidelines is the improvement of the quality and consistency of SREP
practices, and consequently, of their outcomes. The consequences of the adoption of the guidelines
should be that institutions with similar risk profiles, business models and geographic exposures are
reviewed and assessed by competent authorities consistently and subject to broadly equivalent
supervisory expectations, actions and measures, where applicable, including institution -specific
prudential requirements. To achieve this objective, in addition to specifying the SREP procedures
and methodologies, these guidelines also provide guidance for subsequent supervisory measures
that competent authorities should consider, as specified in the CRD.
In accordance with Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, the EBA issues guidelines addressed
to competent authorities, with a view to establishing consistent, efficient and effective supervisory
practices and ensur ing that there is common, uniform, and consistent application of European
Union law.
The aim of these guidelines is to ensure the harmonisation of the SREP framework, while not
imposing restrictive granular SREP procedures and methodologies, as this would not be in line with
the CRD, mandating the drafting of guidelines rather than of binding technical standards.
Competent authorities should, however, apply these guidelines in a way that will not compromise
intended harmonisation and convergence thereof, pa rticularly ensuring that high supervisory
standards are implemented in the EU and that there is no room for supervisory arbitrage.
These guidelines set out the common SREP framework, taking into account the requirements of
Regulation (EU) 575/2013 (CRR) an d the CRD, ensuring consistency with other EU regulatory
products including other EBA guidelines, as well as considering the outcomes of the EBA monitoring
and assessment of convergence and supervisory practices, as requested by Article 107 of the CRD.

[Page 9]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
9
The SREP Guidelines were first published in December 2014 and became applicable since January
2016. The first update took place in 2017 and the revised Guidelines became applicable since 2019.
The second review carried out in 2021 aims at aligning the Guidel ines with other regulatory
developments that took place since the latest revision of the SREP Guidelines. In particular, these
revised guidelines take into account changes stemming from Directive (EU) 2019/878 amending the
CRD and Regulation (EU) 2019/876 amending the CRR, as well as the issuance by the EBA of other
relevant guidelines and technical standards.
The cyclical nature of the SREP assessment advocates the overall SREP framework to be applicable
at the beginning of a SREP cycle. Against this backg round, considering that the SREP cycle often
corresponds to a calendar year, these guidelines apply from 1 January 2023. However, competent
authorities are encouraged to consider the revised guidance and introduce into the current cycle
as many elements as possible.
The common SREP framework
The common SREP framework is built around the following major components (as presented in
Figure 1):
Figure 1. Overview of the common SREP framework
1. Categorisation of institutions:
The application of the principle of proportionality in the SREP is driven by the categorisation of
institutions, the minimum engagement model, as well as targeted flexibility allowing for adjusted
granularity of assessments. The categorisation of institutions into four categories should be based

[Page 10]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
10
on their size, risk profile, structure, internal organisation, scope and on the nature and complexity
of their activities. Such categorisation impacts the minimum engagement level, graduating the
frequency of assess ment, which drives the dialogue with the institution for the purposes of
assessing individual SREP elements and the overall SREP assessment. In addition, the categorisation
takes into account the definitions of small and non-complex institutions as well as large institutions,
as set out in the CRR, to ensure consistency in the scope of application of proportionality within the
overall regulatory framework.
2. Monitoring of key indicators:
Regular monitoring of key quantitative and qualitative indicators suppor ts the SREP by flagging
changes in the institution’s financial conditions and risk profile. Such monitoring should prompt
updates to the assessment of the SREP elements where it highlights new material information
outside of planned supervisory activities.
3. Business model analysis:
Without undermining the responsibility of the institution’s management body for organising and
running its business, the supervisory business model analysis should be the assessment of the
viability of the current business model a nd the sustainability of the strategic plans. This analysis
should also assist in revealing key vulnerabilities the institution is facing that may not be revealed
by other elements of the SREP, including vulnerabilities stemming from ML/TF and ESG risks. Such
analysis does not aim to rank the institutions’ various business models.
4. Assessment of internal governance and institution-wide controls:
As part of the overall governance assessment, competent authorities should determine whether
the internal governance framework of an institution is adequate given its risk profile, size, nature
and complexity, and whether the institution sufficiently adheres to the requirements and standards
of good internal governance and risk controls arrangements, including aspects such as diversity,
non-discrimination and sound code of conduct.
As part of the risk management framework, competent authorities should review the institution’s
internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) and internal liquidity adequacy assessment
process (ILAAP). The assessment should focus on the soundness, effectiveness and
comprehensiveness of these processes, as well as on the rel iability of the institution’s internal
estimates to support the supervisory determination of capital and liquidity adequacy. Furthermore,
competent authorities should also assess the adequacy of institution’s stress testing programmes,
including scenarios and assumptions, and outcomes.
5. Assessment of risks to capital:
The SREP Guidelines provide guidance for the assessment of the most common risks to capital,
encompassing credit and counterparty risk, market risk, operational risk and interest rate risk from
non-trading activities (IRRBB), further split into sub -risk categories. Competent authorities should
focus their assessment on the material risks the institution is or might be exposed to, including any

[Page 11]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
11
additional institution-specific risks that are not described in detail in the guidelines. The assessment
should be performed in terms of the risk exposure as well as the quality of management and
controls employed to mitigate the impact of the risk.
6. Assessment of the adequacy of institution’s own funds:
Since an institution may face risks that are not covered or not fully covered by the own funds
requirements in accordance with the CRR or the capital buffers specified in the CRD, the SREP
Guidelines include guidance on the determination of the quantity and c omposition of additional
own funds requirements (P2R) determined to cover such risks, emphasi sing on their institution -
specific nature. As a separate stack of own funds requirements, the SREP Guidelines also include
guidance on the assessment of the risk o f excessive leverage and on the determination of the
quantity and composition of additional own funds required to cover that risk (P2R -LR). Such P2R
and P2R-LR should be set in a legally binding way, and institutions should be expected to meet them
at all times.
The determination of P2R and P2R -LR should be duly justified to institutions. Aiming to enhance
the supervisory dialogue, the SREP Guidelines include guidance on the minimum scope of
information and justification of the results of the SREP to be pro vided to institutions. Separate
justification is expected for the leverage ratio capital layer and the risk-based capital layer.
Where the outcomes of the relevant stress tests suggest that an institution may not be able to meet
the applicable own funds requirements under stress conditions, or is excessively sensitive to the
assumed scenarios, competent authorities should take appropriate supervisory measures to ensure
the institution is adequately capitalised, including the imposition of guidance on additi onal own
funds, separately, to address the risk of excessive leverage and other risks (P2G -LR and P2G). The
SREP Guidelines provide guidance clarifying the setting of the P2G and P2G-LR, encompassing both
the use of the results of the stress tests, where the maximum anticipated stress test impact should
be considered, and possible adjustments depending on institution -specific circumstances. As P2G
and P2G -LR are positioned above the combined buffer requirements, a failure to meet such
requirements does not trigger automatic restrictions on distribution provided for in Article 141 of
the CRD.
To increase convergence and level the playing field between institutions, the SREP Guidelines
specify the quality of capital competent authorities should require institutions to hold to meet their
guidance on additional own funds, CET1 capital for P2G coverage, and Tier 1 for P2G -LR coverage,
respectively.
7. Assessment of liquidity and funding risks:
The SREP Guidelines provide guidance for the assessment of the risks to liquidity and funding the
institution is or might be exposed to over various time horizons, as well for the related risk
management controls. Competent authorities should focus their assessment on risks identified as
material for the institution.

[Page 12]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
12
8. Assessment of the adequacy of the institution’s liquidity and funding resources:
Competent authorities should determine whether the liquidity resources held by the institution
ensure an appropriate coverage of risks to liquidity and funding, where applicable, taking adequate
supervisory measures. Amo ng such measures, competent authorities may consider imposing
specific liquidity requirements to address concerns related to the institution’s liquidity and funding
resources.
9. Overall SREP assessment and application of supervisory measures:
Having conducted the assessment of the above SREP elements, competent authorities should form
a comprehensive overview of the risk profile and viability of the institution concluding with the
overall SREP assessment. Competent authorities should also consider any necessa ry supervisory
measures to address concerns. These Guidelines provide practical guidance on the application of
the supervisory measures listed in Articles 104a and 105 of the CRD, including the application of
institution-specific additional own funds and liquidity requirements, as well as other measures of a
qualitative nature.
Scoring framework
To help facilitate communication with the competent authorities and colleges of supervisors, foster
comparability and a level playing field across institutions as w ell as to adequately prioritise
supervisory resources and measures in the assessment of SREP elements, competent authorities
should score from a range of ‘1’ (low risk) to ‘4’ (high risk), to reflect the supervisory view for reach
element-specific title of the guidelines. Scores should be assigned based on supervisory judgement,
taking into account assessment considerations provided in the guidelines. These guidelines
introduce two types of scores, the first one indicating the likelihood that the risks to capital, liquidity
and funding will have a significant impact on the institution, while the second type indicates the
magnitude of risks to the institution’s viability to be applied to the four SREP elements and overall
SREP score. These guidelines do not s uggest any automatic link between the scores and the level
of supervisory response, nor do they link additional own funds requirements to the scores.

[Page 13]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
13
Figure 2. Overview of the scoring framework
Link between SREP and other supervisory processes
Competent authorities should reflect in the SREP assessment available information and outcomes
from other supervisory activities, including on -site inspections, approvals of internal models,
authorisation approvals, outcomes of supervisory stress testing, assessment of recovery and
resolution plans, market conduct and consumer protection activities, AML/CFT activities, etc.
Likewise, the findings from the SREP assessment should inform other supervisory processes. Such
cross-utilisation of findings from various activities to inform each other allows for truly integrated
analysis and supervision of institutions, enhancing overall supervisory overview of institutions, their
viability and risks, as well as maximises synergies in various areas of assessments.
These guidelines also identify the relevant building blocks required for an effective supervisory
stress testing programme. They focus on different forms of supervisory stress testing and
objectives, the respective use for SREP purposes, aspects related to the organisation, resources and
communication, and possible methodologies. In particular, the supervisory stress testing section
complements the assessment on capital adequacy by further clarifying and operationalising
procedures for setting P2G and P2G-LR.
Assessment of the risk of money laundering and terrorism financing
These guidelines provide common guidance on how to factor in the anti -money laundering and
countering the financing of terrorism AML/CFT -related aspects into the SREP. Such common
guidance is important in view of the fact that failure to address money laundering and terrorist
financing risks by institutions can have detrimental effects on the financial soundness of these
institutions, the integrity of the internal market and financial stability as a whole. Therefore
prudential supervisors should consider, to the extent known to them, ML/TF risks from a prudential

[Page 14]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
14
perspective throughout their work, including in the SREP, and cooperate with the authorities and
bodies responsible for ensuring compliance with AML/CFT requirements under Directive (EU)
2015/849 in this respect.
The requirement for institutions to have in place policies, controls and procedures to mitigate and
manage effectively the risks of money laundering and terrorist financing, is set out in Directive (EU)
2015/849. Consequently, AML/CFT supervisors are responsible for supervising the institutions’
compliance with those requirements, in accordance with the risk -based approach, including that
the policies, controls and procedures, which have been put in place by institutions are sufficiently
robust to mitigate the ML/TF risks to which they are exposed. In addition, AML/CFT supervisors are
also required to carry out their own ML/TF risk assessments of the sector and also individual
institutions within the sector.
Prudential competent authorities are tasked, within the SREP, with reviewing the arrangements,
strategies, processes and mechanisms implemented by the institutions to comply with Directive
2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and evaluate, inter alia, the risks to which the
institution is or might be exposed. In view of the specific mandate and expertise of AML/CFT
supervisors, which is not expected to be duplicated by prudential supervisors, the input of AML/CFT
supervisors into the SREP with regard to ML/TF risks and how effectively they are managed by
institutions is important. In addition to the information available to them, prudential competent
authorities should also consider informatio n concerning ML/TF risk and other relevant input
received from the AML/CFT supervisors to the extent that it affects compliance with the
requirements under Directive 2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. Conversely,
deficiencies in governance requirements, uncovered by the prudential competent authorities, may
also imply deficiencies in the AML/CFT policies, controls and procedures, which may be relevant for
AML/CFT supervision and therefore cooperation between the AML/CFT and prudential supervisors
is crucial.
SREP is one example where the information from AML/CFT supervision may also be beneficial for
prudential supervisors and vice versa. Therefore, the outcomes of the relevant ML/TF risk
assessments or findings from inspections conducted by AML/CFT supervisors should feed into the
SREP, where they relate to requirements assessed by the competent authorities under Directive
2013/36/EU and Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 . In the meantime, where the SREP assessment of
business models, operational risk, cre dit risk, liquidity and funding and internal governance and
institution-wide controls reveals information related to the institutions’ exposure to increased
ML/TF risks or the management of the ML/TF risk by institutions, the relevant information should
be shared with AML/CFT supervisors to inform the supervision of the requirements under Directive
(EU) 2015/849, including the imposition of AML/CFT supervisory measures or sanctions.
In addition Article 97(6) of Directive 2013/36/EU requires competent author ities to immediately
notify the EBA and the relevant AML/CFT supervisors where their supervisory review, in particular
the evaluation of the governance arrangements, the business model, or the activities of an
institution, gives competent authorities reasonable grounds to suspect that, in connection with that
institution, money laundering or terrorist financing is being or has been committed or attempted,

[Page 15]
GL ON COMMON PROCEDURES AND METHODOLOGIES FOR SREP AND SUPERVISORY STRESS TESTING
15
or there is increased risk in this regard. In the event of potential increased risk of money laundering
or terrorist financing, competent authorities and AML/CFT supervisors should liaise with each other
and notify their common assessment immediately to the EBA1.
Link between the SREP and early intervention measures and resolution
The SREP assessment may also be used in setting triggers for early intervention measures, as
provided for in Article 27 of Directive 2014/59/EU (BRRD). It also allows for the determination of
an institution as ‘failing or likely to fail’, which activates t he formal interaction procedure with
resolution authorities pursuant to Article 32 of that Directive. To this end, these guidelines should
be read together with the EBA Guidelines on triggers for use of early intervention measures 2 and
guidelines on the i nterpretation of the different circumsta nces when an institution shall be
considered as failing or likely to fail3.
Figure 3. Link between ongoing supervision, early intervention and failing or likely to fail
1 The modalities for the cooperation and information exchange between prudential supervisors, AML/CFT supervisors
and financial intelligence units (FIUs) are set out in the EBA Guidelines on cooperation and information exchange between
prudential supervisors, AML/CFT supervisors and financial intelligence units under Directive 2013/36/EU
(EBA/GL/2021/15).
2 EBA Guidelines on triggers for use of early intervention measures (EBA/GL/2015/03).
3 EBA Guidelines on the interpretation of the different circumstances when an institution shall be considered as failing or
likely to fail (EBA/GL/2015/07).

[Page 16]
16
Guidelines

[Page 17]
17
EBA/GL/2022/03
18 March 2022
Guidelines
on common procedures and methodologies for
the supervisory review and evaluation process
(SREP) and supervisory stress testing

[Page 18]
18
Compliance and reporting obligations
Status of these guidelines
1. This document contains guidelines issued pursuant to Article 16 of Regulation (EU) No
1093/20104. In accordance with Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent
authorities and financial institutions must make every effort to comply with the guidelines.
2. Guidelines set the EBA view of appropriate supervisory practices within the Europea n System
of Financial Supervision or of how Union law should be applied in a particular area. Competent
authorities as defined in Article 4(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 to whom guidelines apply
should comply by incorporating them into their practices as appropriate (e.g. by amending their
legal framework or their supervisory processes), including where guidelines are directed
primarily at institutions.
Reporting requirements
3. According to Article 16(3) of Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010, competent authorities must notify
the EBA as to whether they comply or intend to comply with these guidelines, or otherwise
with reasons for non-compliance, by ([dd.mm.yyyy]). In the absence of any notification by this
deadline, competent authorities will be considered by the EBA to be non -compliant.
Notifications should be sent by submitting the form available on the EBA website with the
reference ‘EBA/GL/2022/03’. Notifications should be submitted by persons with appropriate
authority to report compliance on behalf of the ir competent authorities. Any change in the
status of compliance must also be reported to EBA.
4. Notifications will be published on the EBA website, in line with Article 16(3).
4 Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 24 November 2010 establishing a
European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority), amending Decision No 716/2009/EC and repealing
Commission Decision 2009/78/EC, (OJ L 331, 15.12.2010, p.12).

[Page 19]
19
Subject matter, definitions, level
of application and implementation
1.1. Subject matter
5. These guidelines specify the common procedures and methodologies for the functioning of the
supervisory review and evaluation process (SREP) referred to in Articles 97 and 107(1)(a) of
Directive 2013/36/EU5, including those for the assessment of the organisation and treatment
of risks, including money laundering and terrorist financing, referred to in Articles 76 to 87 of
that Directive and processes and actions taken with reference to Articles 98, 100, 101, 102, 104,
104a, 104b, 104c, 105, 107(1)(b) and 117 of that Directive. In addition, these guidelines aim to
provide common methodologies to be used by competent authorities when conducting
supervisory stress tests in the context of their SREP as referred to in Article 100(2) of Directive
2013/36/EU.
6. These guidelines do not set methodologies for the stress tests conducted by the EBA in
cooperation with other competent authorities in accordance with Article 22 of Regulation (EU)
No 1093/2010; however, they do describe the range of stress tests to help set the appropriate
context for the consideration of future EBA stress tests as one part of the supervisory stress
tests.
7. These guidelines are addressed to the competent authorities referred to in Article 4(2), points
(i) and (viii), of the EBA Regulation.
1.2. Definitions
8. Unless otherwise specified, terms used and defined in Regulation (EU) No 575/20136, Directive
2013/36/EU, Directive 2014/59/EU7 or the EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing8, have
the same meaning in the guid elines. For the purposes of the guidelines, the following
definitions apply:
5 Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on access to the activity of credit
institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms, amending Directive 2002/87/EC
and repealing Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC (OJ L 176 27.6.2013, p. 338).
6 Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 26 June 2013 on prudential requirements
for credit institutions and investment firms and amending Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 (OJ L 176 27.6.2013, p. 1).
7 Directive 2014/59/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 May 2014 establishing a framework for the
recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms and amending Council Directive 82/891/EEC, and
Directives 2001/24/EC, 2002/47/EC, 2004/25/EC, 2005/56/EC, 2007/36/EC, 2011/35/EU, 2012/30/EU and 2013/36/EU,
and Regulations (EU) No 1093/2010 and (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 173
12.6.2014, p. 190).
8EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing (EBA/GL/2018/04)

[Page 20]
20
‘AML/CFT supervisor’ means a competent authority responsible for the supervision of
institutions’ compliance with the provisions of Directive (EU) 2015/849.
‘Capital buffer requirements’ means the own funds requirements specified in Chapter 4 of Title
VII of Directive 2013/36/EU.
‘Consolidating institution’ means an institution that is required to abide by the prudential
requirements on the basis of the consolidated situation in accordance with Part 1, Title 2,
Chapter 2 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
‘Conduct risk’ means the current or prospective risk of losses to an institution arising from
cases of wilful or negligent misconduct, including inappropriate supply of financial services.
‘Counterbalancing capacity’ means the institution’s ability to hold, or have access to, excess
liquidity over short -term, medium-term and long -term t ime horizons in response to stress
scenarios.
‘Credit spread risk’ means the risk arising from changes in the market value of debt financial
instruments due to fluctuations in their credit spread.
‘Funding risk’ means the risk that the institution will not have stable sources of funding in the
medium and long term, resulting in the current or prospective risk that it cannot meet its
financial obligations, such as payments and collateral needs, as they fall due in the medium-
to-long term, either at all or without increasing funding costs unacceptably.
‘FX lending’ means lending to borrowers, regardless of the legal form of the credit facility (e.g.
including deferred payments or similar financial accommodations) , in currencies other than
the legal tender of the country in which the borrower is domiciled.
‘FX lending risk’ means the current or prospective risk to the institution’s earnings and own
funds arising from FX lending to unhedged borrowers.
‘Internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP)’ means the process for the
identification, measurement, management and monitoring of internal capital implemented by
the institution pursuant to Article 73 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
‘Internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP) ’ means the process for the
identification, measurement, management and monitoring of liquidity implemented by the
institution pursuant to Article 86 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
‘Institution’s category’ means the indicator of the institution’s systemic importance assigned
based on the institution’s size and complexity and the scope of its activities.
‘Interest rate risk’ (IRR) means the current or prospective risk to the institution’s earnings and
own funds arising from adverse movements in interest rates.

[Page 21]
21
‘Intraday liquidity’ me ans the funds that can be accessed during the business day to enable
the institution to make payments in real time.
‘Intraday liquidity risk’ means the current or prospective risk that the institution will fail to
manage its intraday liquidity needs effectively.
‘Information and communication technology (ICT) risk’ means the risk of loss due to breach of
confidentiality, failure of integrity of systems and data, inappropriateness or unavailability of
systems and data , or inability to change IT within a reasonable time and costs when the
environment or business requirements change (i.e. agility).
‘Macro-prudential requirement’ or ‘measure’ means a requirement or measure imposed by a
competent or designated authority to address macroprudential or systemic risk.
‘Material currency’ means a currency in which the institution has material balance -sheet or
off-balance-sheet positions.
‘Money laundering and terrorist financing (ML/TF) risk’ means the risk as defined in the EBA
Risk-Based Supervision Guidelines9.
‘Overall capital requirement (OCR)’ means the sum of the total SREP capital requirement
(TSCR), capital buffer requirements and macroprudential requirements, when expressed as
own funds requirements.
‘Overall leverage ratio requirement (OLRR)’ me ans the sum of the total SREP leverage ratio
requirement (TSLRR) and the G-SII leverage ratio buffer requirement in accordance with Article
92(1a) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
‘Overall SREP assessment’ means the up -to-date assessment of the overall viab ility of an
institution based on assessment of the SREP elements.
‘Overall SREP score’ means the numerical indicator of the overall risk to the viability of the
institution based on the overall SREP assessment.
‘Pillar 2 guidance (P2G)’ means the level and quality of own funds the institution is expected
to hold in excess of its OCR, determined in accordance with the criteria specified in these
guidelines.
‘Pillar 2 guidance for the risk of excessive leverage (P2 G-LR)’ means the level and quality of
own funds the institution is expected to hold in excess of its OLRR, determined in accordance
with the criteria specified in these guidelines.
9 EBA Guideli nes on the characteristics of a risk -based approach to anti -money laundering and terrorist financing
supervision, and the steps to be taken when conducting supervision on a risk -sensitive basis under Article 48(10) of
Directive (EU) 2015/849 (amending the Joint Guidelines ESAs 2016 72) (‘The Risk -Based Supervision Guidelines’) (
EBA/GL/2021/16).

[Page 22]
22
‘Pillar 2 requirement (P2R)’ or ‘additional own funds requirements’ means the additional own
funds requirements imposed in accordance with Article 104 (1)(a) of Directive 2013/36/EU to
address risks other than the risk of excessive leverage.
‘Pillar 2 requirement for the risk of excessive leverage (P2R -LR)’ or ‘additional own fund s
requirements to address the risk of excessive leverage’ means the additional own funds
requirements imposed in accordance with Article 104(1)(a) of Directive 2013/36/EU to address
the risk of excessive leverage.
‘Reputational risk’ means the current or p rospective risk to the institution’s earnings, own
funds or liquidity arising from damage to the institution’s reputation.
‘Risk appetite’ means the aggregate level and types of risk the institution is willing to assume
within its risk capacity, in line with its business model, to achieve its strategic objectives.
‘Risk score’ means the numerical expression summarising the supervisory assessment of an
individual risk to capital, liquidity and funding representing the likelihood that a risk will have
a signi ficant prudential impact on the institution (e.g. potential loss) after considering risk
management and controls and before consideration of the institution’s ability to mitigate the
risk through available capital or liquidity resources.
’Risks to capital’ means distinct risks that , should they materialise, will have a significant
prudential impact on the institution’s own funds over the next 12 months. These include but
are not limited to risks covered by Articles 79 to 87 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
‘Risks to liquidity and funding’ mean s distinct risks that, should they materialise, will have a
significant prudential impact on the institution’s liquidity over different time horizons.
‘SREP element’ means one of the following: business model analysis, assessment of internal
governance and institution -wide risk controls, assessment of risks to capital, SREP capital
assessment, assessment of risks to liquidity and funding, or SREP liquidity assessment.
‘Structural FX risk’ means the risk arising from equity held that has been deployed in offshore
branches and subsidiaries in a currency other than the parent undertaking’s reporting
currency.
‘Supervisory benchmarks’ means risk-specific quantitative tools developed by the competent
authority to provide an estimation of the own funds required to cover risks or elements of risks
not covered by Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
‘Survival period’ means the period during which the institution can continue operating under
stressed conditions and still meet its payments obligations.
‘Total risk exposure amount (TREA)’ means total risk exposure amount as defined in Article 92
of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.

[Page 23]
23
‘Total SREP capital requirement (TSCR)’ means the sum of own funds requirements as specified
in Article 92(1), points (a) to (c) of Regulation (EU ) No 575/2013 and additional own funds
requirements determined in accordance with the criteria specified in th ese guidelines to
address risks other than the risk of excessive leverage.
‘Total SREP leverage ratio requirement (TSLRR)’ means the sum of own funds requirements as
specified in Article 92(1), point (d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and additional own funds
requirements determined in accordance with the criteria specified in these guidelines to
address the risk of excessive leverage.
‘Unhedged borrowers’ means retail and SME borrowers without a natural or financial hedge
that are exposed to a currency mismatch between the loan currency and the hedge currency;
natural hedges include in particular cases where borrowers receive income in a foreign
currency (e.g. remittances/export receipts), while financial hedges normally presum e that
there is a contract with a financial institution.
‘Viability score’ means the numerical expression summarising the supervisory assessment of a
SREP element and representing an indication of the risk to the institution’s viability stemming
from the SREP element assessed.
1.3. Level of application
9. Competent authorities should apply these guidelines in accordance with the level of application
determined in Article 110 of Directive 2013/36/EU following the requirements and waivers
used pursuant to Articles 108 and 109 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
10. For parent undertakings and subsidiaries included in the consolidation, competent authorities
should adjust the depth and the level of granularity of their assessments to correspond to the
level of application established in the requirements of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 specified
in Part One, Title II of that Regulation , in particular recognising waivers applied pursuant to
Articles 7, 10 and 15 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and Article 21 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
11. Where an institution has a subsidiary in the same Member State, but no waivers specified in
Part One of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 have been granted, a proportionate approach for the
assessment of capital and liquidity adequacy may be applied by focusing on the assessment of
allocation of capital and liquidity across the entities and potential impediments to the
transferability of capital or liquidity within the group.
12. For cross-border groups, procedural requirements should be applied in a coordinated manner
within the framework of colleges of supervisors established pursuant to Article 116 or 51 of
Directive 2013/36/EU. Title 11 explains the details of how these guidelines apply to cross -
border groups and their entities.
13. When an institution has established a liquidity subgroup pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation
(EU) No 575/2013, competent authorities should conduct their assessment of risks to liquidity

[Page 24]
24
and funding, and apply supervisory measures , for the entities covered by such a subgroup at
the level of the liquidity subgroup.
1.4. Date of application
14. These updated guidelines apply from 1 January 2023.
1.5. Repeal
15. The EBA Guidelines on common procedures and methodologies for the supervisory review and
evaluation process ( SREP) and supervisory stress testing of 19 December 2014
(EBA/GL/2014/13) and the amending guidelines of 19 July 2018 (EBA/GL/2018/03) are repealed
with effect from 1 January 2023. The references to the Guidelines repealed shall be construed
as reference to these guidelines.

[Page 25]
25
The common SREP
2.1. Overview of the common SREP framework
16. Competent authorities should ensure that the SREP of an institution covers the following
components:
a. categorisation of the institution and periodic review of this categorisation;
b. monitoring of key indicators;
c. business model analysis (BMA);
d. assessment of internal governance and institution-wide controls;
e. assessment of risks to capital;
f. assessment of risks to liquidity;
g. assessment of the adequacy of the institution’s own funds;
h. assessment of the adequacy of the institution’s liquidity resources;
i. overall SREP assessment; and
j. supervisory measures (and early intervention measures, where necessary).
2.1.1. Categorisation of institutions
17. Competent authorities should categorise all institutions under their supervisory remit into the
following categories:
► Category 1 – all institutions defined as ‘large institutions’ pursuant to Article 4(1),
point (146) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and, as appropriate, other institutions
determined by competent authorities, based on an assessment of the institution’s
size and internal organisation and the nature, scope and complexity of its activities.
Competent authoritie s can decide to classify ‘large institutions’ under Article
4(1)(146) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 that are not G-SIIs or O-SIIs as Category-
2 institutions as appropriate based on the assessment of the institution’s risk
profile.
► Category 2 – medium to large institutions other than those included in Category 1
which are not a ‘small and non-complex institution’ as defined in Article 4(1) point
(145) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and operate domestically or with sizable

[Page 26]
26
cross-border activities, in several business lines, including non -banking activities,
and offering credit and financial products to retail and corporate customers ; non-
systemically important specialised institutions with significant market shares in
their lines of business or payment system s, or financial exchanges ; institutions
considered important, due to their size, activities, or business model (e.g. central
institutions of an IPS, CCPs, CSDs, central cooperative banks or central savings
banks), for the economy (e.g. in terms of total assets over gross domestic product
– TA/GDP) or for the banking sector in a particular Member State.
► Category 3 – small to medium institutions other than those included in Categories
1 and 2, which are not ‘small and non-complex institution’ as defined in Article 4(1)
point (145) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and operating domestically or with
non-significant cross -border operations, and operating in a limited number of
business lines, offering predominantly credit products to retail and corporate
customers with a limited offering of financial products; specialised institutions with
less-significant market shares in their lines of business or payment systems, or
financial exchanges.
► Category 4 – all institutions defined as ‘small and non-complex institution’ pursuant
to Article 4(1), point (145) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and all other small non-
complex institutions that do not fall into Categories 1 to 3 (e.g. with a limited scope
of activities and non-significant market shares in their lines of business).
18. The categorisation should reflect the assessment of systemic risk posed by institutions to the
financial system. It should be used by competent authorities as a basis for applying the principle
of proportionality, as specified in Section 2.4, and not as a means to reflect the quality of an
institution.
19. Competent authorities should base the categorisation on supervisory reporting data and on
information derived from the preliminary business model analysis (see Section 4.2). The
categorisation should be reviewed periodically, or in the event of a significant corporate event,
such as a large divestment, a merger or acquisition, an important strategic action, etc.
2.1.2. Continuous assessment of risks
20. Competent authorities should continuously assess the risks to which the institution is or might
be exposed through the following activities:
a. monitoring of key indicators as specified in Title 3;
b. business model analysis as specified in Title 4;
c. assessment of internal governance and institution -wide controls as specified in
Title 5;

[Page 27]
27
d. assessment of risks to capital as specified in Title 6; and
e. assessment of risks to liquidity and funding as specified in Title 8.
21. The assessments should be conducted in accordance with the proportionality criteria specified
in Section 2.4. The assessments should be reviewed in light of new information.
22. Competent authorities should ensure that the findings of the assessments outlined above:
a. are clearly documented in a summary of findings;
b. are reflected in a score assigned in accordance with the specific guidance provided
in the element-specific title of these guidelines;
c. support the assessments of other elements or prompt an in-depth investigation
into inconsistencies between the assessments of these elements;
d. contribute to the overall SREP assessment and score; and
e. result in supervisory measures, where appropriate, and inform the decisions taken
for these measures.
2.1.3. Periodic assessment of capital and liquidity adequacy
23. Competent authorities should periodically review the adequacy of the institution’s own funds
and liquidity to provide sound coverage of the risks to which the institution is or might be
exposed through the following assessments:
a. SREP capital assessment as specified in Title 7; and
b. SREP liquidity assessment as specified in Title 9.
24. The periodic assessments should be conducted in accordance with the proportionality criteria
specified in Section 2.4. Competent authorities may perform more frequent assessments.
Competent authorities should review the assessment in light of material new findings from the
SREP risk assessment where competent authorities determine that the findings may have a
material impact on the institution’s own funds and/or liquidity resources.
25. Competent authorities should ensure that the findings of the assessments:
a. are clearly documented in a summary;
b. are reflected in the score assigned to the institution’s capital adequacy and liquidity
adequacy, in accordance with the guidance provided in the element-specific title;
c. contribute to the overall SREP assessment and score; and

[Page 28]
28
d. take into account and inform the supervisory requirement for the institution to
hold own funds and/or liquidity resources in excess of the minimum requirements
specified in Regulation (EU ) No 575/2013, or for other supervisory measures, as
appropriate.
2.1.4. Overall SREP assessment
26. Competent authorities shoul d continuously assess the risk profile of the institution and its
viability through the overall SREP assessment as specified in Title 10. Through the overall SREP
assessment, competent authorities should determine the potential for risks to cause the failure
of the institution given the adequacy of its own funds and liquidity resources, governance,
controls and/or business model or strategy, and from this, the need to take early intervention
measures, and/or determine whether the institution can be considered to be failing or likely to
fail.
27. The assessment should be continuously reviewed in light of findings from the risk assessments
or the outcome of the SREP capital and SREP liquidity assessments.
28. Competent authorities should ensure that the findings of the assessment:
a. are reflected in the score assigned to the institution’s overall viability, in
accordance with the guidance provided in Title 10;
b. are clearly documented in a summary of the overall SREP assessment that includes
the SREP scores assigned (overall and for individual elements) and any supervisory
findings made over the course of the previous 12 months; and
c. form the basis for the supervisory determination of whether the institution can be
considered to be ‘failing or likely to fail ’ pursuant to Article 32 of
Directive 2014/59/EU.
2.1.5 Dialogue with institutions, application of supervisory measures and
communicating findings
29. Following the minimum engagement model, as specified in Section 2.4, competent authorities
should engage in dialogue with ins titutions to assess individual SREP elements, as provided in
the element-specific titles.
30. Based on the overall SREP assessment and building on assessments of the individual SREP
elements, c ompetent authorities should take supervisory measures as specified in Title 10.
Supervisory measures in these guidelines are grouped as follows:
a. capital measures;
b. liquidity measures; and

[Page 29]
29
c. other supervisory measures (including early intervention measures).
31. Where findings from the monitoring of key indicators, assessment of SREP elem ents or any
other supervisory activity necessitate the application of supervisory measures to address
immediate concerns, competent authorities should not wait for the completion of the
assessment of all SREP elements and update of the overall SREP assessment, but decide on the
measures required to rectify the situation assessed, and then proceed with updating the overall
SREP assessment.
32. Competent authorities should also engage in dialogue based o n the outcomes of the overall
SREP assessment, alongside associated supervisory measures, and inform the institution at the
end of the process about supervisory measures with which it is obliged to comply as outlined
in Section 2.4.
2.2 Scoring in the SREP
33. Competent authorities should assign risk and viability scores to summarise the outcomes of the
assessment of various risk categories and elements in the SREP framework.
34. In the assessment of the individual risk categories and SREP elements, competent authorities
should use a range of scores – 1 (low risk), 2 (medium-low risk), 3 (medium -high risk), and 4
(high risk) – reflecting the supervisory view based on the relevant scoring tables in each
element-specific title. Competent authorities should use the accompanying ‘considerations’
provided in these tables for guidance to support supervisory judgement (i.e. it is not necessary
for the institution to fulfil all the ‘considerations’ linked to a score of ‘1’ to achieve a score of
’1’), and/or further develop them or add additional considerations. Compete nt authorities
should assign a score of ‘4’ to reflect the worst possible assessment (i.e. even if the institution’s
position is worse than that envisaged by the ‘considerations’ for a score of ‘4’, a score of ‘4’
should still be assigned).
35. In their implementation of the guidelines, competent authorities may introduce more granular
scoring for their internal purposes, such as planning of resources, provided that the overall
scoring framework set out in these guidelines is respected.
36. Competent authorities should ensure that all scores are regularly reviewed, at least with the
frequency defined in Section 2.4 and without undue delay on the basis of material new findings
or developments.
2.2.1 Risk scores
37. Competent authorities should assign risk scores to individual risks to capital in accordance with
the criteria specified in Title 6, and scores to risks to liquidity and funding in accordance with
the criteria specified in Title 8. These scores represent the likelihood that a risk will have a
significant prudential impact on the institution (e.g. potential loss), after considering the quality

[Page 30]
30
of risk controls to mitigate this impact (i.e. residual risk), but before consideration of the
institution’s ability to mitigate the risk through available capital or liquidity resources.
38. Competent authorities should determine the risk score predominantly through an assessment
of inherent risk, but they should also reflect considerations about risk management and
controls. In particular, the adequacy of management and c ontrols may increase or – in some
cases – reduce the risk of significant prudential impact (i.e. considerations relating to inherent
risk may under- or overestimate the level of risk depending on the adequacy of management
and controls). The assessment of inherent risk and the adequacy of management and controls
should be made with reference to the considerations specified in Tables 4 to 7 and 9 and 10.
39. In implementing these guidelines, competent authorities may use different methods to decide
on individual risk scores. Inherent risk levels and the quality of risk management and controls
may be scored separately (resulting in an intermediate and final score) or in aggregate.
Competent authorities may also introduce aggregation methodologies for aggregating
individual risks to capital and liquidity and funding scores.
2.2.2 Viability scores including an overall SREP score
40. Competent authorities should separately assign scores to summarise the level of risk posed to
the viability of the institution based on the outcomes of the assessment of the four SREP
elements:
a. business model and strategy, in accordance with the criteria specified in Title 4;
b. internal governance and institution-wide controls, in accordance with the criteria
specified in Title 5;
c. capital adequacy, in accordance with the criteria specified in Title 7; and
d. liquidity adequacy, in accordance with the criteria specified in Title 9.
41. For capital adequacy and liquidity adequacy, these scores represent the supervisory view of the
capacity of the institution’s capital and liquidity resources to mitigate/cover individual risks to
capital and liquidity and funding, as set out in Titles 6 and 8, and /or other elements for which
additional own funds have been determined as set out in Title 7.
42. Competent authorities should also assign an overall SREP score in accordance with the criteria
specified in Title 10. This score should be assigned based on supervisory judgement and should
represent the supervisory view of the overall viability of the institution.
43. Competent authorities should ensure that the scoring of the business model, internal
governance and institution-wide controls, capital adequacy, liquidity adequacy and the overall
SREP score achieves the following objectives:

[Page 31]
31
a. indicating the likelihood that supe rvisory measures may need to be taken to
address concerns in accordance with the criteria specified in Title 10;
b. acting as a trigger for the decision on whether to apply early intervention measures
in accordance with the EBA Guidelines on triggers for use of early intervention
measures10; and
c. helping with the prioritisation and planning of supervisory resources and the
setting of priorities in the supervisory examination programme (SEP).
44. Competent authorities should ensure that the overall SREP score assigned on the basis of the
aggregate view of the threats from the four SREP elements provide s an indication of the
institution’s overall viability, including whether the institution is ‘failing or likely to fail’ within
the meaning of Article 32 of Directive2014/59/EU, also having regard to the EBA Guidelines on
‘failing or likely to fail’ 11.When the outcome of the overall SREP assessment suggests that an
institution can be considered to be ‘failing or likely to fail’, competent authorities should apply
a score of ‘F’ and follow the process of engaging with resolution authorities as specified in
Article 32 of Directive 2014/59/EU.
2.3 Organisational arrangements
45. Competent authorities should ensure that, for conducting the SREP, their organisational
arrangements include at least the following:
a. a description of the roles and responsibilities of their supervisory staff with respect
to performing the SREP, as well as the relevant reporting lines, in both normal and
emergency situations;
b. procedures for documenting and recording findings and supervisory judgements;
c. arrangements for the approval of the findings and scores, as well as escalation
procedures where there are of dissenting views within the competent authority, in
both normal and emergency situations;
d. arrangements for organising dialogue with the institution following the model of
minimum engagement as stipulated in Section 2.4 to assess individual SREP
elements; and
e. arrangements for consultations with an institution and communicating the
outcomes of the SREP to the institution, also reflecting the interaction within
10 EBA Guidelines on triggers for use of early intervention measures (EBA/GL/2015/03)
11 EBA Guidelines on the interpretation of the different circumstances when an institution shall be considered as failing
or likely to fail under Article 32(6) of Directive 2014/59/EU (EBA/GL/2015/07)

[Page 32]
32
colleges of supervisors for cross -border groups and their entities, also in
accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 710/201412.
46. When defining arrangements for dialogue with institutions, competent authorities should
consider potential implications of providing the scores to the institutions in terms of their
disclosure obligations pursuant to the requirements of Regulation (EU ) No 596/201413 and
Directives 2014/57/EU14 and 2004/109/EC15.
2.4 Proportionality and supervisory engagement
47. Competent authorities should apply the principle of proportionality in the scope, frequency and
intensity of supervisory engagement and dialogue with a n institution, and supervisory
expectations of the standards the institution should meet, in accordance with the category of
the institution. In all cases, the assessment of risks to capital and risks to liquidity and funding
should include an assessment of at least the most material individual risks.
48. Regardless of the institution’s category, when informing about the outcome of the overall SREP
assessment, competent authorities should provide in particular:
a. a statement on the quantity and composition of the own funds the institution is
required to hold in excess of the requirements specified in Regulation (EU) No
575/2013 and in Chapter 2 of Regulation (EU) 2017/240216, relating to elements of
risks and risks not covered by these Regulations;
b. a statement on the quantity and composition of the own funds the institution is
guided to hold in excess of the requirements specified in point (a) and in Chapter 4
of Title VII of Directive 2013/36/EU;
c. a statement on the liquidity held and any specific liquidity requirements set by the
competent authority; and
12 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 710/2014 of 23 June 2014 laying down implementing technical
standards with regard to conditions of application of the joint decision process for institution -specific prudential
requirements according to Directive 2013/36/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council (OJ L 188, 27.6.2014, p.
19).
13 Regulation (EU) No 596/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on market abuse (market-
abuse regulation) and repealing Directive 2003/6/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council and Commission
Directives 2003/124/EC, 2003/125/EC and 2004/72/EC (OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 1).
14 Directive 2014/57/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on criminal sanctions for market
abuse (market-abuse directive) (OJ L 173, 12.6.2014, p. 179).
15 Directive 2004/109/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 15 December 2004 on the harmonisation of
transparency requirements in relation to information about issuers whose securitie s are admitted to trading on a
regulated market and amending Directive 2001/34/EC (OJ L 390, 31.12.2004, p. 38).
16 Regulation (EU) 2017/2402 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 2017 laying down a general
framework for securitisation and creating a specific framework for simple, transparent and standardised securitisation,
and amending Directives 2009/65/EC, 2009/138/EC and 2011/61/EU and Regulations (EC) No 1060/2009 and (EU) No
648/2012 (OJ L 347, 28.12.2017, p. 35).

[Page 33]
33
d. a statement on other supervisory measures, including any early intervention
measures that the competent authority intends to take.
49. For the frequency and intensity of the supervisory engagement aspect of proportionality, when
planning SREP activities, competent authorities should adhere to a minimum level of
engagement model, as follows (and as outlined in Table 1).
2.4.1 Category 1 institutions
50. In order to ensure appropriate frequency of supervisory activities related to SREP for Category
1 institutions, competent authorities should:
a. monitor key indicators on a quarterly basis;
b. produce a documented summary of the overall SREP assessment at least annually;
c. update the assessments of all individual SREP elements at least annually;
d. inform the institution of the outcome of the overall SREP assessment at least
annually;
e. have ongoing engagement and dialogue with the institution’s management body
and senior management, as defined in paragraph 3(9) of Directive 2013/36/EU, to
assess each SREP element.
2.4.2 Category 2 institutions
51. In order to ensure appropriate frequency of supervisory activities related to SREP for Category
2 institutions, competent authorities should:
a. monitor key indicators on a quarterly basis;
b. produce a documented summary of the overall SREP assessment at least annually;
c. update the assessments of all individual SREP elements at least every 2 years;
d. inform the institution of the outcome of the overall SREP assessment at least every
2 years;
e. have ongoing engagement and dialogue with the institution’s management body
and senior management to assess each SREP element.
2.4.3 Category 3 institutions
52. In order to ensure appropriate frequency of supervisory activities related to SREP for Category
3 institutions, competent authorities should:

[Page 34]
34
a. monitor key indicators on a quarterly basis;
b. produce a documented summary of the overall SREP assessment at least annually;
c. update the assessments of all individual SREP elements at least every 3 years, or
sooner in light of material new information emerging on the risk posed;
d. inform the institution of the outcome of the overall SREP assessment at least every
3 years;
e. have risk-based engagement and dialogue with the institution’s management body
and senior management (i.e. where necessary) to assess the material-risk
element(s).
2.4.4 Category 4 institutions
53. In order to ensure appropriate frequency of supervisory activities related to SREP for Category
4 institutions, competent authorities should:
a. monitor key indicators on a quarterly basis;
b. produce a documented summary of the overall SREP assessment at least annually;
c. update the assessments of all individual SREP elements at least every 3 years, or
sooner in light of mat erial new information emerging on the risk posed , tailoring
the scope and depth of the review of such an update to the specific risk profile of
the institution;
d. inform the institution of the outcome of the overall SREP assessment at least every
3 years;
e. have engagement and dialogue with the institution’s management body and senior
management at least every 3 years.
2.4.5 Minimum requirements for supervisory engagement
Table 1. Application of SREP to different categories of institutions
Category Monitoring
of key
indicators
Assessment of all
SREP elements (at
least)
Summary of
the overall
SREP
assessment
Minimum level of
engagement/dialogue
1 Quarterly Annual Annual
Ongoing engagement with
institution’s management
body and senior management;
engagement with institution

[Page 35]
35
Category Monitoring
of key
indicators
Assessment of all
SREP elements (at
least)
Summary of
the overall
SREP
assessment
Minimum level of
engagement/dialogue
for assessment of each
element.
2 Quarterly Every 2 years Annual
Ongoing engagement with
institution’s management
body and senior management;
engagement with institution
for assessment of each
element.
3 Quarterly Every 3 years Annual
Risk-based engagement with
institution’s management
body and senior management;
engagement with institution
for assessment of material risk
element(s).
4 Quarterly
Every 3 years with
the scope and
depth of the review
tailored to the
specific risk profile
of the institution
Annual
Engagement with institution’s
management body and senior
management at least every 3
years.
54. Where competent authorities determine that institutions have similar risk profiles, they ma y
conduct thematic SREP assessments on multiple institutions as a single assessment (e.g. a BMA
may be conducted on all small mortgage lenders given that it is likely to identify the same
business viability issues for all these institutions). Competent authorities may also use tailored
methodologies for the application of the SREP for institutions with similar risk profiles, such as
similar business models or geographical location of exposures in accordance with Article 97(4a)
of Directive 2013/36/EU.
55. Competent authorities should determine an additional level of engagement based on the
findings from previous assessments of one or more SREP elements, whereby more extensive
supervisory resources and a higher intensity and frequency of engagement should be required,
tailored to the situation of the individual institution in terms of risks and vulnerabilities,
regardless of the category of the institution, for institutions with a poor overall SREP score (at
least on a temporary basis).
56. For institutions covered by the supervisory examination programme required by Article 99 of
Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities should ensure that the level of engagement and
application of the SREP is determined by that programme.

[Page 36]
36
57. When planning S REP activities, competent authorities should pay special attention to
coordinating activities with other parties directly or indirectly involved in the assessment, in
particular when input is required from the institution and/or other competent authorities
involved in the supervision of cross-border groups as specified in Title 11 of these guidelines.
2.4.6 Focus and granularity of the assessment
58. For the scope of proportionality, when conducting the SREP by applying these guidelines,
competent authorities should recognise that different elements, methodological aspects and
assessment components as provided in Titles 4, 5, 6 and 8 do not have the same relevance for
all institutions; competent authorities should, where relevant, apply different de grees of
granularity to the assessment depending on the category to which the institu tion is assigned
and to the extent appropriate for the size and business model of the institution, and the nature,
scale and complexity of its activities.
59. Having regard to paragraphs 57 and 58, competent authorities may also determine the specific
focus of SREP, where more detailed assessment is carried out in selected areas, while less
scrutiny, but sufficient for meaningful assessment, is devoted to all other SREP elements. Such
a focus of SREP may be based on mu lti-year planning, economic circumstances or specific
situation of an institution. In determining the focus and granularity of the assessment,
competent authorities should take into account the risk profile of the institution, the
materiality of the differ ent risks and any changes thereof , including those observed in the
monitoring of key indicators as outlined in Title 3, stress testing as outlined in Title 12 or in the
outcome of previous SREP assessments.

[Page 37]
37
Monitoring of key indicators
60. Competent authorities should engage in regular monitoring of key financial and non -financial
indicators to monitor changes in the financial condition s and risk profile s of institutions.
Competent authorities should also use this monitoring to identify the need for updates to the
assessment of SREP elements in light of new material information outside of planned
supervisory activities. Where monitoring reveals a material change in the risk profile of the
institution, or any anomalies in the indicators , competent authorities should investigate the
causes, and, where relevant, review the assessment of the relevant SREP element in light of the
new information.
61. Following the model of minimum engagement discussed in Title 2, competent authorities
should monitor ke y financial and non -financial indicators at least on a quarterly basis for all
institutions. However, depending on the specific features of the institutions or situation,
competent authorities may establish more frequent monitoring, taking into consideration the
availability of the underlying information (e.g. market data).
62. Competent authorities should establish monitoring systems and patterns allowing for the
identification of material changes and anomalies in the behaviour of indicators, and should set
thresholds, where relevant. Competent authorities should also establish escalation procedures
for all relevant indicators (or combinations of indicators) covered by the monitoring to ensure
that anomalies and material changes are investigated.
63. Competent authorities should tailor the set of indicators and their thresholds to the specific
features of individual institutions or groups of institutions with similar characteristics (peer
groups). The f ramework of indicators, monitoring patterns and thresholds should reflect the
institution’s size, complexity, business model and risk profile and should cover geographies,
sectors and markets where the institution operates.
64. Competent authorities should identify the indicators to be tracked through regular monitoring
primarily from regular supervisory reporting and using definition s from common reporting
standards. Where relevant, EBA dashboards or indicators being monitored by the EBA may be
used as a source of information against which individual institutions can be monitored.
65. The framework of indicators established and the outcomes of the monitoring of key indicators
should also be used as input for the assessment of risks to capital and risks to liquidity and
funding under the respective SREP elements.
66. Indicators used for monitoring should include at least the following institution -specific
indicators:

[Page 38]
38
a. financial and risk indicators addressing all risk categories covered by these
guidelines (see Titles 6 and 8);
b. all the ratios deriv ed from the application of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and
from the national law implementing Directive 2013/36/EU for calculating the
minimum prudential requirements (e.g. Core Tier 1 (CT1), liquidity coverage ratio
(LCR), net stable funding ratio (NSFR), etc.);
c. the minimum requirements for own funds and eligible liabilities (MREL) as specified
by Directive 2014/59/EU;
d. relevant market -based indicators (e.g. equity price, credit default swap ( CDS)
spreads, bond spreads, etc.);
e. where available, recovery indicators used in the institution’s own recovery plans;
and
f. where available, indicators based on quantitative or qualitative information from
reporting provided to competent authorities that may point to ML/TF risk.
67. Competent authorities should accompany institution -specific indicators with relevant
macroeconomic indicators, where available, in the geographies, sectors and markets where the
institution operates.
68. Identification of material changes or anomalies in indicators, especially in cases where changes
are outliers to the peer-group performance, should be considered by competent authorities as
a prompt for further investigation. Specifically, competent authorities should:
a. determine the cause and make an assessment of materiality of the potential
prudential impact on the institution;
b. document the cause and the outcome of the assessment; and
c. review the risk assessment and SREP score, where relevant, in light of any new
findings.
69. Competent authorities should also consider supplementing the regular monitoring of key
financial and non-financial indicators with review of independent market research and analysis,
where this is available, which can be a helpful source of alternative points of view.

[Page 39]
39
Business model analysis
4.1 General considerations
70. This title specifies criteria for the assessment of the business model and strategy of the
institution. Competent authorities should apply this assessment to an institution at the same
level as the overall SREP assessment, but it can also be applied at business or product-line level,
or on a thematic basis.
71. Without undermining the responsibility of the institution’s management body for running and
organising the business, or indicating preferences for specific business models, competent
authorities should conduct regular business model analys is (BMA) to assess business and
strategic risks and determine:
► the viability of the institution’s current business model on the basis of its ability to
generate acceptable returns over the following 12 months; and
► the sustainability of the institution’s strategy on the basis of its ability to generate
acceptable returns over a forward -looking period of at least 3 years, based on its
strategic plans and financial forecasts.
72. Competent authorities should use the outcome of the BMA to support the assessment of all
other elements of the SREP. Competent authorities may assess specific aspects of the BMA, in
particular the quantitative assessment of the business model , as part of the assessment of
other SREP elements (e.g. understanding the funding structure can be part of the risks to
liquidity assessment).
73. Competent authorities should also use the BMA to support the identification of the institution’s
key vulnerabilities, which are most likely to have a material impact on the institution/lead to its
failure in the future.
74. Competent authorities should also use the BMA to assess prudential implications of ML/TF risks
known to them, linked to the business model of the institution. In this respect, competent
authorities should use the inpu t received from AML/CFT supervisors, in particular their
assessments of ML/TF risks and any findings relating to material weaknesses in an institution’s
AML/CFT controls, to complement their findings from ongoing supervision, and evaluate
whether they give rise to prudential concerns related to ML/TF risk. Where the assessment
indicates the business model of the institution gives rise to prudential concerns related to
ML/TF risk, competent authorities should share the outcome of the prudential assessment of
the business model with the AML/CFT supervisors17.
17 In accordance with the EBA AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines (EBA/GL/2021/15).

[Page 40]
40
75. Competent authorities should undertake the following steps as part of the BMA:
a. preliminary assessment;
b. identification of the areas of focus;
c. assessment of the business environment;
d. quantitative analysis of the current business model;
e. qualitative analysis of the current business model;
f. analysis of the forward -looking strategy and financial plans (including planned
changes to the business model);
g. assessment of business model viability;
h. assessment of sustainability of the strategy;
i. identification of key vulnerabilities to which the institution’s business model and
strategy expose it or may expose it; and
j. summarising of the findings and scoring.
76. To conduct the BMA , competent authorities should use at least the following sources of
quantitative and qualitative information:
a. institution’s strategic plan(s) with current-year and forward-looking forecasts, and
underlying economic assumptions;
b. financial reporting (e.g. profit and loss (P&L), balance-sheet disclosures);
c. regulatory reporting (common reporting (COREP), financial reporting (FINREP) and
credit register, where available);
d. internal reporting (management information, capital planning, liquidity reporting,
internal risk reports);
e. recovery and resolution plans , including the results of resolvability assessment
provided by the resolution authority in accordance with Article 14 of Directive
2014/59/EU;
f. third-party reports (e.g. audit reports, reports by equity/credit analysts); and
g. other relevant studies/surveys (e.g. from the International Monetary Fund ( IMF),
macroprudential authorities and institutions, European institutions).

[Page 41]
41
4.2 Preliminary assessment
77. Competent authorities should analyse the institution’s main activities, geographies and market
position to identify, at the highest level of consolidation in the jurisdiction, the institution’s:
a. major geographies;
b. major subsidiaries/branches;
c. major business lines; and
d. major product lines.
78. For this purpose, competent authorities should consider a range of relevant metrics at the point
of assessment and changes over time. These metrics should include:
a. contribution to overall revenues/costs;
b. share of assets;
c. share of TREA; and
d. market position.
79. Competent authorities should use this preliminary assessment to:
a. determine materiality of business areas /lines: competent authorities should
determine which geographies, subsidiaries/branches, business lines and product
lines are the most material based o n profit contribution (e.g. based on P&L) , risk
(e.g. based on TREA or other measures of risk) and/or organisational/statutory
priorities (e.g. specific obligations for public sector banks to offer specific products).
Competent authorities should use this information as a basis for identifying what
the BMA should focus on (covered further in Section 4.3);
b. identify the peer group: competent authorities should determine the relevant peer
group for the institution ; to conducting a BMA , the competent authority should
determine the peer group on the basis of the rival product/business lines targeting
the same source of profits/customers (e.g. the credit -card businesses of different
institutions targeting credit card users in country X);
c. support the application of the principle of proportionality : competent authorities
may use the outcomes of the preliminary assessment to help with the allocation of
institutions to proportionality categories on the basis of the identified complexity
of the institutions (as specified in Section 2.1.1).

[Page 42]
42
4.3 Identifying the areas of focus for the BMA
80. Competent authorities should determine the focus of the BMA. They should focus on the
business lines that are most important in terms of viability or future sustainability of current
business model, and/or most likely to increase the institution’s exposure to existing or new
vulnerabilities. Competent authorities should take into account:
a. the materiality of business lines – whether certain business lines are more
important in terms of generating profits (or losses);
b. previous supervisory findings – whether the findings for other elements of the SREP
can provide indicators on business lines requiring further investigation;
c. findings and observations from internal or external audit reports – whether the
audit function has identified specific issues regarding the sustainability or viability
of certain business lines;
d. importance to strategic plans – whether there are business lines that the institution
wishes to grow substantially, or decrease;
e. outcomes of thematic supervisory reviews – whether a sector-wide analysis has
revealed common underlying issues that prompt additional institution -specific
analysis;
f. observed changes in the business model – whether there are observed de facto
changes in the business model that have occurred without the institution declaring
any planned changes or releasing new strategic plans;
g. peer comparisons – whether a business line has performed atypically (been an
outlier) compared to peers;
h. findings and observations from the preliminary business model assessment
including those that point to a potential exposure of the business model to ML/TF
risks.
4.4 Assessing the business environment
81. To form a view on the plausibility of an institution’s strategic assumptions , competent
authorities should undertake an analysis of the business environment. Th is takes into
consideration the current and future business conditions in which an institution operates or is
likely to operate based on its main or material geographic and business exposures. As part of
this assessment, competent authorities should develo p an understanding of the direction of
macroeconomic and market trends and the strategic intentions of the peer group.
82. Competent authorities should use this analysis to develop an understanding of:

[Page 43]
43
a. the key macroeconomic variables within which the relevant entity, product or
segment being assessed operates or will operate based on its main geographies.
Examples of key variables include gross domestic product ( GDP), unemployment
rates, interest rates and house price indices.
b. the competitive landscape and how it is likely to evolve, considering the activities
of the peer group. Examples of areas for review include expected target -market
growth (e.g. residential mortgage market) and the activities and plans of key
competitors in the target market.
c. overall trends in the market that may have an impact on the institution’s
performance and profitability. This should include , as a minimum, regulatory
trends (e.g. changes to retail banking product distribution legislation),
technological trends (e.g. moves to electronic platforms for certain types of
trading) and societal/demographic trends (e.g. greater demand for Islamic banking
facilities).
4.5 Analysis of the current business model
83. To understand the means and methods used by an institution to operate and generate profits,
competent authorities should undertake quantitative and qualitative analyses.
4.5.1 Quantitative analysis
84. Competent authorities should undertake an analysis of quantitative features of the institution’s
current business model to understand its financial performance and the degree to which this is
driven by its risk appetite being higher or lower than peers.
85. Areas for analysis by competent authorities should include:
a. profit and loss, including trends : competent authorities should assess the
underlying profitability of the institution (e.g. after exception items and one-offs),
the breakdown of income streams, the breakdown of costs, impairment provisions
and key ratios (e.g. net interest margin, cost/income, loan impairment). Competent
authorities should consider how the above items have evolved in recent years and
identify underlying trends;
b. the balance sheet, including trends: competent authorities should assess the asset
and liability mix, the funding structure, the change in the TREA and own funds, and
key ratios (e.g. return on equity, Core Tier 1, funding gap). Competent authorities
should consider how the above items have evolved in recent years and identify
underlying trends;
c. concentrations, including their trends: competent authorities should assess
concentrations in the P&L and balance sheet related to custo mers, sectors and

[Page 44]
44
geographies. Competent authorities should consider how the above items have
evolved in recent years and identify underlying trends; and
d. risk appetite: competent authorities should assess the formal limits put in place by
the institution by risk type (credit risk, funding risk, etc.) and its adherence to them
to understand the risks that the institution is willing to take to drive its financial
performance.
4.5.2 Qualitative analysis
86. Competent authorities should undertake an analysis of qualitative features of the institution’s
current business model to understand its success drivers and key dependencies.
87. Areas for analysis by competent authorities should include:
a. key external dependencies : competent authorities should determine the main
exogenous factors that influence the success of the business model ; these may
include third-party providers, intermediaries and specific regulatory drivers;
b. key internal dependencies : competent authorities sho uld determine the main
endogenous factors that influence the success of the business model ; these may
include the quality of IT platforms and operational and resource capacity;
c. franchise: competent authorities should determine the strength of relationship s
with customers, suppliers and partners; this may include the institution’s reliance
upon its reputation, the effectiveness of branches, the loyalty of customers and the
effectiveness of partnerships; and
d. areas of competitive advantage: competent authorities should determine the areas
in which the institution has a competitive advantage over its peers; these may
include any of the above, such as the quality of the institution’s IT platforms, or
other factors, such as the institution’s global network, the sc ale of its business or
its product proposition.
e. In the analysis, competent authorities should consider any indications that the
business model and activities give rise to increased ML/TF risks, including deposit-
taking or establishment or use of legal enti ties in high -risk third countries, as
identified in accordance with Article 9 of Directive (EU) 2015/849. Where present,
these indications should be complemented by quantitative analysis, as
appropriate, focusing in particular on the materiality of the rev enues and the
income from operations run in such high-risk third countries, the concentrations of
exposures to customers for which the institution apply enhanced customer due
diligence as set out in Chapter II, Section 3 of Directive 2015/849 . Competent
authorities should exchange information with the AML/CFT supervisor on these
indications as laid out in paragraph 74.

[Page 45]
45
4.6 Analysis of the strategy and financial plans
88. Competent authorities should undertake a quantitative and qualitative forward -looking
analysis of the institution’s financial projections and strategic plan to understand the
assumptions, plausibility and riskiness of its business strategy.
89. Areas for analysis by competent authorities should include:
a. overall strategy: competent authorities should consider the main quantitative and
qualitative management objectives;
b. projected financial performance: competent authorities should consider projected
financial performance, covering the same or similar metrics as those covered in the
quantitative analysis of the current business model;
c. success drivers of the strategy and financial plan : competent authorities should
determine the key changes proposed to the current business model to meet the
objectives;
d. assumptions: competent authorities should determine the plausibility and
consistency of the assumptions made by the institution that drive its strategy and
forecasts; these may include assumptions in areas such as macroeconomic metrics,
market dynamics, volume and margin growth in key products, segments and
geographies, etc.; and
e. execution capabilities: competent authorities should determine the institution’s
execution capabilities based on the managemen t’s track record in adhering to
previous strategies and forecasts, and the complexity and ambition of the strategy
set compared to the current business model. In assessing the execution
capabilities, competent authorities should also take into account the capabilities to
execute the strategy from a risk management perspective.
90. Competent authorities may conduct p arts of this analysis concurrently with the quantitative
and qualitative analysis of the current business model, particularly the analysis of the projected
financial performance and of the success drivers of the strategy.
4.7 Assessing business model viability
91. Having conducted the analyses covered in Sections 4.4 and 4.5, competent authorities should
form, or update, their view on the viability of the institution’s current business model on the
basis of its ability to generate acceptable returns over the following 12 months, given its
quantitative performance, key success drivers and dependencies and business environment.
92. Competent authorities should assess the acceptability of returns against the following criteria:

[Page 46]
46
a. return on equity (ROE) against cost of equity (COE) or equivalent measure :
competent authorities should consi der whether the business model generate s a
return above cost (excluding one -offs) on the basis of ROE against COE; other
metrics, such as return on assets or risk -adjusted return on capital , as well as
considering changes in these measures through the cycle, may also support this
assessment;
b. funding structure: competent authorities should consider whether the funding mix
is appropriate to the business model and to the strategy ; volatility or mismatches
in the funding mix may mean that a business model o r strategy, even one that
generates returns above costs, may not be viable or sustainable given the current
or future business environment; and
c. risk appetite : competent authorities should consider whether the institution’s
business model or strategy relies on a risk appetite, for individual risks (e.g. credit,
market) or more generally, that is considered high or is an outlier amongst the peer
group to generate sufficient returns.
4.8 Assessing the sustainability of the institution’s strategy
93. Having conducted the analyses covered in Sections 4.4 to 4.6, competent authorities should
form, or update, their view on the sustainability of the institution’s strategy on the basis of its
ability to generate acceptable returns, as defined above, over a forward -looking period of at
least 3 years based on its strategic plans and financial forecasts and given the supervisory
assessment of the business environment.
94. In particular, competent authorities should assess the sustainability of the institution’s strategy
based on:
a. the plausibility of the institution’s assumptions and projected financial
performance compared to the supervisory view of the current and future business
environment;
b. the impact on the projected financial performance of the supervisory view of th e
business environment (where this differs from the institution’s assumptions); and
c. the risk level of the strategy (i.e. the complexity and ambition of the strategy
compared to the current business model) and the consequent likelihood of success
based on t he institution’s likely execution capabilities (measured by the
institution’s success in executing previous strategies of a similar scale or the
performance against the strategic plan so far and taking into account the
capabilities to execute the strategy from a risk management perspective).

[Page 47]
47
4.9 Identification of key vulnerabilities
95. Having conducted the BMA, competent authorities should assess the key vulnerabilities to
which the institution’s business model and strategy expose it or may expose it, considering any
of the following:
a. poor expected financial performance;
b. reliance on an unrealistic strategy;
c. excessive concentrations or volatility (e.g. of revenues, earnings, customers subject
to enhanced customer due diligence set out in Chapter II, Sect ion 3 of Direc tive
2015/849, high-risk third countries in accordance with Article 9 of that Directive,
deposits and asset s under custody/management related to such high -risk third
countries;
d. excessive risk-taking;
e. funding structure concerns;
f. significant external issues (e.g. regulatory threats, such as mandating of ‘ring-
fencing’ of business units); and
g. ESG risks and their impact on the viability and sustainability of the business model
and long-term resilience of the institution.
96. Following the above assessment, competent authorities should form a view on the viability of
the institution’s business model and the sustainability of its strategy, and any necessary
measures to address problems and concerns.
4.10 Summary of findings and scoring
97. Based on the assessment of the viability and sustainability of the business model, competent
authorities should form an overall view on the business model viability and strategy
sustainability, and any potential risks to the viability of an institution stemming from this
assessment. This view should be reflected in a summary of findings, accompanied by a viability
score based on the considerations specified in Table 2.
Table 2. Supervisory considerations for assigning a business model and strategy score
Score Supervisory view Considerations
1 The business model and strategy
pose low level of risk to the
viability of the institution.
• The institution generates strong and stable
returns which are acceptable given its risk
appetite and funding structure.

[Page 48]
48
Score Supervisory view Considerations
• There are no material asset concentrations
or unsustainable concentrated sources of
income.
• The institution h as a strong competitive
position in its chosen markets and a
strategy likely to reinforce this.
• The institution has financial forecasts
drawn up on the basis of plausible
assumptions about the future business
environment.
• Strategic plans are appropriate gi ven the
current business model and management
execution capabilities.
2 The business model and strategy
pose a medium-low level of risk to
the viability of the institution.
• The i nstitution generates average returns
compared to peers and/or historic
performance which are broadly acceptable
given its risk appetite and funding
structure.
• There are some asset concentrations or
concentrated sources of income.
• The institution f aces competitive pressure
on its products/services in one or more key
markets. Some doubt about its strategy to
address the situation.
• The institution h as financial forecasts
drawn up on the basis of optimistic
assumptions about the future business
environment.
• Strategic plans are re asonable given the
current business model and management
execution capabilities, but not without risk.
3 The business model and strategy
pose a medium -high level of risk
to the viability of the institution.
• The institution generates returns that are
often weak or not stable, or relies on a risk
appetite or funding structure to generate
appropriate returns that raise supervisory
concerns.
• There are significant asset concentrations
or concentrated sources of income.
• The institution has a weak competitive
position for its products/services in its
chosen markets, and may have few
business lines with good prospects. The
institution’s market share may be declining
significantly. There are d oubts about its
strategy to address the situation.
• The institution has financial forecasts
drawn up on the basis of overly optimistic

[Page 49]
49
Score Supervisory view Considerations
assumptions about the future business
environment.
• Strategic plans may not be plausible given
the current business model and
management execution capabilities.
4 The business model and strategy
pose a high level of risk to the
viability of the institution.
• The institution generates very weak and
highly unstable returns, or relies on an
unacceptable risk appetite or funding
structure to generate appropriate returns.
• The institution has extreme asset
concentrations or unsustainable
concentrated sources of income.
• The institution has a very poor competitive
position for its products/services in its
chosen markets and participates in
business lines with very weak prospects.
Strategic plans are very unlikely to address
the situation.
• The institution has financial fore casts
drawn up on the basis of very unrealistic
assumptions about the future business
environment.
• Strategic plans are not plausible given the
current business model and management
execution capabilities.

[Page 50]
50
Assessing internal governance and
institution-wide controls
5.1 General considerations
98. Competent authorities should assess whether or not an institution’s internal governance
arrangements are adequate for and commensurate with the institution’s risk profile, business
model, nature, size and complexity. They should identify the extent to which the institution
complies with the applicable EU and national requirements regarding sound internal
governance arrangements and identify any shortcomings. Competent authorities should
evaluate, in particular, whether or not the internal governance arrangements ensure the sound
management of risks and inc lude appropriate internal controls and oversight. Competent
authorities should establish if there are material risks posed by poor internal governance
arrangements and their potential effect on the risk profile and sustainability of the institution.
99. For SR EP, the assessment of institution’s internal governance and institution -wide controls
should include an assessment of the following areas:
a. the overall internal governance framework, which should include a clear organi sational
structure;
b. the composition, or ganisation and functioning of the management body and its
committees, where established;
c. corporate and risk culture;
d. remuneration policies and practices;
e. the internal control framework, which should include well -functioning independent risk
management, compliance and internal audit functions;
f. the risk management framework, including ICAAP, ILAAP, new product approval process,
including material changes to products, systems and processes and exceptional
transactions;
g. the integrity of administrative and accounting procedures;
h. outsourcing policy and strategy;
i. information and communication technologies and business continuity; and
j. the recovery plan.

[Page 51]
51
100. The assessment of internal governance should inform the specific assessment of risk
management and controls as specified in Titles 6 and 8, as well as the assessment of ICAAP and
ILAAP in the SREP capital assessment ( Title 7) and the SREP liquidity assessment ( Title 9).
Likewise, a risk-by-risk analysis of ICAAP calculations/capital estimates reviewed under Title 7,
and any deficiencies identified there by, should inform the assessment of the overall ICAAP
framework assessed under this title.
101. In line with the EBA Guidelines on internal governance 18, the assessment of the internal
governance framework should include the verification of the existence of governance
arrangements and mechanisms to ensure that the institution complies with applicable
AML/CFT requirements and take into account any supplementary information received from
the AML/CFT supervisor on the assessment of these arrangements and mechanisms.
5.2 Overall internal governance framework
102. In line with the EBA Guidelines on internal governance, the Joint ESMA and EBA Guidelines
on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body and key function
holders19, the EBA Guidelines on disclosure requirements20, the EBA Guidelines on outsourcing
arrangements21 and the EBA Guidelines on sound remuneration policies 22, the assessment of
the internal governance framework by competent authorities should include an assessment of
whether the institution demonstrates at least that:
a. the duties of the management body are clearly defined, distinguishing between the duties
of the management (executive) function and of the supervisory (non-executive) function
and that appropriate governance arrangements have been implemented;
b. a suitable and transparent organisational and operational structure with well -defined,
transparent and consistent lines of responsibility, including those of the management
body and its committees has been set up;
c. the management body has set and ensured th e implementation of the overall business
and risk strategies, including the setting of the institution’s risk appetite, on an individual
and a consolidated basis with the appropriate involvement of the management body;
d. risk culture through policies and th eir implementation, including communication and
training, are appropriate;
18 EBA Guidelines on internal governance under Directive 2013/36/EU (EBA/GL/2021/05).
19 Joint ESMA and EBA Guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of members of the management body and key
function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU (EBA/GL/2021/06)
20 EBA Guidelines on disclosure requirements under Part Eight of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (EBA /GL/2016/11).
21 EBA Guidelines on outsourcing arrangements (EBA/GL/2019/02).
22 EBA Guidelines on sound remuneration policies under Articles 74(3) and 75(2) of Directive 2013/36/EU and disclosures
under Article 450 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (EBA/GL/2021/04).

[Page 52]
52
e. a selection and suitability assessment process for the members of the management body
and key function holders has been implemented;
f. an adequate and effective internal governance and internal control framework is in place
with independent risk management, compliance and internal audit functions that have
sufficient authority, stature and resources to perform their functions;
g. a remuneration policy and remuneration practices that are in line with the remuneration
principles set out in Articles 92 to 95 of Directive 2013/36/EU and the EBA Guidelines on
sound remuneration policies have been implemented;
h. arrangements aimed at ensuring the integrity of the accounting and financial reporting
systems, including financial and operational controls and compliance with the law and
relevant standards have been implemented;
i. an outsourcing policy and strategy that consider the impact of outsourcing on the
institution’s business and the risks it faces have been implemented;
j. the internal governance framework is set, overseen and regularly assessed by the
management body; and
k. that the internal governance framework is transparent to stakeholders, including
shareholders.
5.3 Organisation and functioning of the management body
103. In accordance with Articles 74 and 91 of Directive 2013/36/EU and with the EBA Guidelines
on internal governance and the Joint E SMA and E BA Guidelines on the assessment of the
suitability of members of the management body and key function holder s, competent
authorities should assess whether:
a. arrangements aimed at ensuring that the individual and collective suitability of the
management body and the individual suitability key function holders are implemented
and carried out effectively upon appointment, when material changes happen (e.g. those
having an impact on the conditions assessed in the context of the initial fit and proper
assessment) and on an ongoing basis , including notification to the relevant competent
authorities;
b. the composition and succession planning of the management body are appropriate;
c. the management body has a policy in place to promote diversity within the management
body, without prejudice to anti-discrimination rules, and whether such a diversity policy
is reflected in the recruitment policy for the management body , ensuring a sufficiently
diverse pool of candidates ;; and, as regard s significant institutions, whether th ey have
set a quantitative target for the representation of the underrepresented gender;

[Page 53]
53
d. effective interaction exists between the management body in its management and
supervisory functions;
e. the management body in its management function appropriately directs the business and
the supervisory function oversees and monitors management decision -making and
actions;
f. all members of the management body act independently;
g. there is sufficient time commitment by the members of the management body to perform
their functions;
h. the limitation on the number of directorship for significant institutions as set out in Article
91(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU is complied with;
i. appropriate internal governance practices and procedures are in place for the
management body and its committees, where established; and
j. the management body in its management function and in its supervisory function and the
risk committee, where established, have appropriate access to information on the risk
situation of the institution.
5.4 Corporate values and risk culture
104. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate and
transparent corporate structure that is suitable and sound, consistent corporate values and a
risk culture that is comprehensive and proportionate to the nature, scale and complexity of the
risks inherent to the business model and the institution’s activities, and consistent with the
institution’s risk appetite.
105. In line with the EBA Guidelines on internal governance, competent authorities should
assess whether:
a. the management body fully knows and understands the legal, organisational and
operational structure of the institution (‘know your structure’) and ensures that it is
consistent with its approved business and risk strategy and risk appetite;
b. institutions have not set up opaque or unnecessarily complex structures that have no
clear economic rationale or legal purpose, or such structures raise concerns that they
might be used for a purpose connected with financial crime. When setting up complex
structures, the management body understands them, their purpose and the particular
risks associated with them and ensures that the internal control functions are
appropriately involved;

[Page 54]
54
c. institutions have developed an integrated and institution-wide risk culture, based on a full
understanding and holistic view of the risks they face and how they are managed, taking
into account the institution’s risk appetite;
d. the institution’s ethical corporate and risk culture promotes an environment of
constructive challenge in which decision -making processes encourage a broad range of
views;
e. institutions have implemented independent internal whistleblowing procedures and
processes that allow information to be submitted in an anonymised way to the
management body and other responsible functions;
f. institutions appropriately manage conflicts of interests at an institutional level and have
established a conflict-of-interest policy for staff to manage conflicts between the private
interests of the staff and the interests of the institution;
g. institutions appropriately identify, document and manage potential conflicts of interest
resulting from loans or other transactions with members of the management body and
their related parties;
h. institutions ensure that the re is no discrimination of staff and that there are equal
opportunities for all genders;
i. there is clear, strong and effective communication of strategies, corporate values, a code
of conduct and/or other similar instrument, risk and other policies to all relevant staff,
and the risk culture is applied across all levels of the institution; and
j. as part of the code of conduct, institutions set out principles on and provide examples of
acceptable and unacceptable behaviours linked in particular to financial misreporting and
misconduct, economic and financial crime, including but not limited to fraud, ML/TF, anti-
trust practices, financial sanctions, bribery and corruption , market manipulation, mis -
selling and other violations of consumer protection laws, ta x offences, whether
committed directly or indirectly, including through unlawful or banned dividend arbitrage
schemes.
5.5 Remuneration policies and practices
106. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has a remuneration policy and
practices, as specified in Articles 92 to 95 of Directive 2013/36/EU, for staff whose professional
activities have a material impact on the institution’s risk profile and appropriate remuneration
policies for all staff members that are gender neutral. In line with the EBA Guidelines on internal
governance and the EBA Guidelines on sound remuneration policies, competent authorities
should assess whether:

[Page 55]
55
a. the remuneration policy is consistent with the institution’s business and risk strateg ies,
corporate culture and values, the long-term interests of the institution and the measures
taken to avoid conflicts of interest , does not encourage excessive risk-taking and is
maintained, approved and overseen by the management body;
b. the remuneration policy is gender neutral a nd institutions have taken appropriate
measures to monitor the development of the gender pay gap over time;
c. staff whose professional activities have a material impact on the institution’s risk profile
(identified staff) are appropriately identified and the criteria set out in Article 92(3) of
Directive 2013/36/EU and in Commission D elegated Regulation (EU) 2021/923, are
properly applied, in particular with regard to:
i. the application of the qualitative and quantitative criteria for the identification of
staff; and
ii. the provisions on exclusion of staff who are identified only under the quantitative
criteria specified in Article 6 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/923;
d. institutions have carried out a proper allocation between the fixed and variable elements
of remuneration, paying particular attention to the treatment of allowances or role-based
payments, guaranteed variable remuneration, severance pay etc.;
e. the combination of variable and fixed remuneration is appropriate, the provisions on the
limitation of the variable remuneration component to 100% of the fixed remuneration
component (200% with shareholders’ approval) are complied with and variable
remuneration is not paid through vehicles or methods that facilitate non-compliance with
Directive 2013/36/EU or Regulation (EU) No 575/2013;
f. variable remuneration for identified staff is based on performance, the requirements on
deferral, retention, pay out in instruments and the application of malus and clawback are
respected and t he institution does not use vehicles or practices to circumvent
remuneration requirements;
g. institutions properly apply the remuneration requirements on a consolidated or sub -
consolidated basis in accordance with Article 109 of Directive 2013/36/EU; and
h. institutions give adequate consideration to restrictions regarding variable remuneration
as a consequence of receiving state support or due to recommendations or decisions of
competent authorities.
5.6 Internal control framework
107. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate internal
control framework. This assessment should include, at least whether:

[Page 56]
56
a. the institution has adequate written internal control policies in place a nd has
implemented an internal contr ol framework within the business units, other relevant
units and within independent internal control functions;
b. there is a clear, transparent and documented decision -making process with a clear
allocation of responsibilities for implementation of the internal control framework and its
components;
c. there is an adequate segregation of duties and information barriers where necessary;
d. all independent internal control functions are effective and have appropriate and
sufficient resources, authority and stature to fulfil their mission, and where necessary
direct access to the management body in its supervisory function;
e. the internal control framework covers all areas of the institution, with a clear allocation
of business and support units being responsible in the f irst instance for establishing and
maintaining adequate internal controls and risk management procedures;
f. there is exchange of the necessary information, including policies, mechanisms and
procedures and their updates, in a timely manner that ensures that the management
body, business lines and internal units, including each independent internal control
function, are able to carry out their duties;
g. the institution has a new product approval policy and process (NPAP), including a process
for material changes or exceptional transactions, with a clearly specified role for the
independent risk management and compliance functions, approved by the management
body;
h. the institution has the capacity to produce written risk reports, uses them for
management purposes and such risk reports are:
i. timely, accurate, concise, comprehensive, clear and useful; and
ii. produced and communicated to the relevant parties with the appropriate
frequency; and
i. internal audit recommendations are subject to a formal follow -up procedure by th e
appropriate levels of management to ensure and report on their effective and timely
resolution.
Risk management function
108. In line with the EBA Guidelines on internal governance, competent authorities should
assess whether the institution has established an independent risk management function and
at least whether such a function:

[Page 57]
57
a. is a central organisational feature covering the whole institution and structured so
that it can implement risk policies and control the risk management framework and
is actively involved in all material risk management decisions;
b. ensures that all group -wide risks are identified, measured, assessed, monitored
and properly reported on by the relevant business lines or internal units and that
the risk strategy is complied with;
c. independently assesses breaches of risk appetite or limits and informs the business
units and management body, recommending possible remedies.
109. Taking into account the EBA Guidelines on internal governance, c ompetent authorities
should assess whether t he head o f the risk management function has sufficient expertise,
authority, stature and independence.
Compliance function
110. In line with the EBA Guidelines on internal governance , competent authorities should
assess whether the institution has established a permanent, independent and effective
compliance function and at least whether such a function:
a. is subject to a well -documented compliance policy which is communicated to all
staff and overseen by the management body;
b. ensures that compliance monitoring is carried out through a structured and well -
defined compliance monitoring programme and that the compliance policy is
observed.
111. Taking into account the EBA Guidelines on internal g overnance, c ompetent authorities
should assess whether institutions appointed a person responsible for the compliance function
across the institution. Where such a person is at the same time the head of the risk
management function or performs another seni or role, competent authorities should assess
whether there may be any conflict of interest.
Internal audit function
112. In line with the EBA Guidelines on internal governance, competent authorities should
assess whether the institution has established an effective independent internal audit function
that:
a. adheres to national and international professional standards;
b. has its purpose, authority and responsibility defined in a mandate that recognises
professional standards and that is approved by the management body;

[Page 58]
58
c. has its organisational independence and the internal auditors ’ objectivity protected,
including by an appropriate segregation of duties and direct reporting lines to the
management body;
d. assesses the appropriateness of the instituti on’s governance framework, including
whether existing policies and procedures remain adequate and comply with legal and
regulatory requirements, with decisions of the management body and with the risk
appetite and strategy of the institution;
e. assesses whether procedures are correctly and effectively implemented (e.g. compliance
with conduct requirements of transactions, compliance of the level of risk effectively
incurred with the risk appetite and limits, etc.);
f. assesses the adequacy, quality and effective ness of the controls performed and the
reporting done by the business units and the internal risk management and compliance
functions;
g. adequately covers all areas in a risk -based audit plan, including ICAAP, ILAAP and NPAP;
and
h. determines if the institutio n adheres to internal policies and relevant EU and national
legislation and addresses any deviations from either.
5.7 Risk management framework
113. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has established an
appropriate risk management framework and risk management processes. Competent
authorities should review, at least:
a. whether the risk strategy, risk appetite and risk management framework are appropriate
and implemented on an individual and a consolidated basis;
b. the ICAAP and ILAAP frameworks;
c. stress testing capabilities and results;
d. whether the institution has established an independent risk management function
covering the whole institution, which is actively involved in drawing up the institution’s
risk strategy and all material risk man agement decisions, and which provides the
management body and business units with all relevant risk-related information;
e. whether the institution has a head of the risk management function with sufficient
expertise, independence and seniority, and, where ne cessary, direct access to the
management body in its supervisory function;

[Page 59]
59
f. whether the independent risk management function ensures that the institution’s risk
measurement, assessment and monitoring processes are appropriate;
g. whether the institution has put in place policies and procedures to identify, measure,
monitor, mitigate and report risk and associated risk concentrations and whether these
are in line with the institution’s risk limits and risk appetite or are approved by the
management body; and
h. whether the institution has established strengthened processes for the approval of
decisions on which the head of the risk management function or head of compliance have
expressed a negative view.
5.7.1 Risk appetite framework and strategy
114. When assessing the risk management framework, competent authorities should consider
the extent to which it is embedded in, and how it influences, the overall str ategy of the
institution. Competent authorities should, in particular, assess if there are appropriate and
consistent link s between the business strategy, the risk strategy, risk appetite and risk
management framework, and the capital and liquidity management frameworks.
115. When reviewing the risk strategy, risk appetite and risk management framework of an
institution, competent authorities should assess whether:
a. the responsibility of the management body in respect of the risk strategy, risk appetite
and risk management framework is exercised in practice by providing appropriate
direction and oversight;
b. the risk strategy and risk appetite consider all material risks to which the institution is
exposed and contain risk limits, tolerances and thresholds;
c. the risk strategy and risk appetite are consistent and implemented;
d. the risk appetite framework is forward-looking, in line with the strategic planning horizon
set out in the business strategy and regularly reviewed;
e. the risk strategy and appetite appropriately c onsider the risk tolerance and financial
resources of the institution (i.e. the risk appetite should be consistent with supervisory
own funds and liquidity requirements and other supervisory measures and
requirements); and
f. the risk strategy and risk appeti te statement are documented in writing and there is
evidence that they have been communicated to the staff of the institution.
5.7.2 ICAAP and ILAAP frameworks

[Page 60]
60
116. Competent authorities should periodically review the institutions’ ICAAP and ILAAP based
on the information collected from the institutions in accordance with the EBA Guidelines on
ICAAP and ILAAP information collected for SREP purposes 23 and determine their soundness,
effectiveness and comprehensiveness according to the criteria specified in this se ction.
Competent authorities should also assess how ICAAP and ILAAP are integrated into overall risk
management and strategic management practices, including capital and liquidity planning.
117. These assessments should contribute to the determination of additional own funds
requirements and the assessment of capital adequacy as outlined in Title 7, as well as to the
evaluation of liquidity adequacy as outlined in Title 9.
Soundness of the ICAAP and ILAAP
118. To evaluate the soundness of the ICAAP and ILAAP, competent authorities should consider
whether the policies, processes, inputs and models constituting the ICAAP and ILAAP are
proportionate to the nature, scale and complexity of the activities of the institution. To do so,
competent authorities should assess the appropriateness of the ICAAP and ILAAP for assessing
and maintaining an adequate level of internal capital and liquidity to cover risks to which the
institution is or might be exposed and to make business decisions (e.g. in relation to allocating
capital under the business plan), including under stressed conditions in line with the EBA
Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing.
119. In the assessment of the soundness of the ICAAP and ILAAP, competent authorities should
consider, where relevant:
a. whether methodologies and assumptions applied by institutions are appropriate and
consistent across risks, are grounded in solid empirical input data, use robustly calibrated
parameters and are applied equally for risk measurement and capital and liquidity
management;
b. whether the confidence level is consistent with the risk appetite and whether the internal
diversification assumptions reflect the business model and the risk strategies;
c. whether the definition and composition of available internal capital or liquidity resources
considered by the institution for the ICAAP and ILAAP are consistent with the risks
measured by the institution and are eligible for the calculation of own funds and liquidity
buffers; and
d. whether the distribution/allocation of available internal capital and liquidity resources
among business lines or legal entities properly reflects the risk to which each of them is
or may be exposed, and properly takes into account any legal or operational constraints
on the transferability of these resources.
23 EBA Guidelines on ICAAP and ILAAP information collected for SREP purposes (EBA/GL/2016/10)

[Page 61]
61
Effectiveness of the ICAAP and ILAAP
120. When assessing the effectiveness of the ICAAP and ILAAP, competent authorities should
examine their use in the decision -making and manage ment process es at all levels in the
institution (e.g. limit setting, performance measurement, etc.). Competent authorities should
assess how the institution uses the ICAAP and ILAAP in its risk, capital and liquidity management
(use test). The assessment should consider the interconnections and interrelated functioning
of the ICAAP and ILAAP with the risk appetite framework, risk management, and liquidity and
capital management, including forward -looking funding strategies , and whether they are
appropriate for the business model and complexity of the institution.
121. To this end, competent authorities should assess whether the institution has policies,
procedures and tools to facilitate:
a. clear identification of the functions and/or relevant co mmittees responsible for the
different elements of the ICAAP and ILAAP (e.g. modelling and quantification, internal
auditing and validation, monitoring and reporting, issue escalation, etc.);
b. capital and liquidity planning : the calculation of capital and l iquidity resources on a
forward-looking basis (including in assumed stress scenarios) in connection with the
overall strategy or significant transactions;
c. the allocation and monitoring of capital and liquidity resources among business lines and
risk types (e.g. risk limits defined for business lines, entities or individual risks are
consistent with the objective of ensuring the overall adequacy of the institution’s internal
capital and liquidity resources);
d. the regular and prompt reporting of capital and liquidity adequacy to senior management
and to the management body (in particular, the frequency of reporting should be
adequate with respect to risks and business -volume development, existing internal
buffers and the internal decision -making process to allow the institution’s management
to put in place remedial actions before capital or liquidity adequacy is jeopardised); and
e. senior management or management body awareness and action s, where business
strategy and/or significant individual transactions may be inconsistent with the ICAAP and
available internal capital (e.g. senior -management approval of a significant transaction
where the transaction is likely to have a material impact on available internal capital ) or
with the ILAAP and available internal liquidity resources ILAAP.
122. Competent authorities should assess whether the management body demonstrates
appropriate commitment to and knowledge of the ICAAP and ILAAP and their outcomes . In
particular, they should assess whether the management body approves t he ICAAP and ILAAP
frameworks and outcomes and, where relevant, the outcomes of internal validation of the
ICAAP and ILAAP.

[Page 62]
62
123. Competent authorities should assess the extent to which the ICAAP and ILAAP are forward-
looking in nature. Competent authorities sh ould do this by assessing the consistency of the
ICAAP and ILAAP with capital and liquidity plans and strategic plans.
Comprehensiveness of the ICAAP and ILAAP
124. Competent authorities should assess the ICAAP’s and ILAAP’s coverage of business lines,
legal entities and risks to which the institution is or might be exposed, and the ICAAP’s and
ILAAP’s compliance with legal requirements. In particular, they should assess:
a. whether the ICAAP and ILAAP are implemented homogenously and proportionately for
all the relevant institution’s business lines and legal entities with respect to risk
identification and assessment;
b. whether the ICAAP and ILAAP cover all material risks regardless of whether the risk arises
from entities not subject to consolidation ( special-purpose vehicles ( SPVs), special-
purpose entities (SPEs)); and
c. where any entity has different internal governance arrangements or processes from the
other entities of the group , whether these deviations are justified (e.g. the adoption of
advanced models by only part of the group may be justified by a lack of sufficient data to
estimate parameters for some business lines or legal entities, provided that these
business lines or legal entities do not represent a source of risk concentration for the rest
of the portfolio).
5.7.3 Assessment of institutions’ stress testing
125. Competent authorities should review and assess institutions’ stress testing programmes
and their compliance with the EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing, taking into account
the size and internal organisation of institutions and the nature, scale and complexity of their
activities, in particular in relation to governance arrangements, data infrastructure, use of
stress testing in ICAAP and ILAAP and management a ctions as referred to in Title 4 of those
guidelines.
126. Competent authorities should perform a qualitative assessment of stress testing
programmes, as well as a quantitative assessment of the results of stress tests. Competent
authorities should consider the outcomes of qualitative and quantitative assessments together
with the results of supervisory stress tests (see Title 12) for the pu rposes of assessing capital
and liquidity adequacy and determining the appropriate supervisory response to the
deficiencies identified.
127. Furthermore, supervisory assessments of institutions’ stress testing programmes, and the
outcomes of various stress tests performed by an institution as part of its stress testing
programme, could inform the assessment of various SREP elements and, in particular:

[Page 63]
63
a. The identification of possible vulnerabilities or weaknesses in risk management a nd
controls on individual risk areas. These should be used as an additional source of
information to be taken into account by the competent authorities when assessing
individual risks to capital as referred to in Title 6 of these Guidelines, or risks to li quidity
and funding as referred to in Title 8 of these Guidelines. Scenario and sensitivity analyses
performed by an institution can be used to assess the exposure to individual risks and the
related sensitivities to underlying risk factors.
b. The identifica tion of possible deficiencies in overall governance arrangements or
institution-wide controls. Th ese should be considered by competent authorities as an
additional source of information for the purposes of the SREP assessment of internal
governance and ins titution-wide controls. Furthermore , the results of an institution’s
stress tests can be used in assessing the institution’s capital planning, and in particular its
time dimension.
c. The quantification of specific quantitative liquidity requirements in the context of the
assessment of liquidity adequacy, especially where a competent authority has not
developed specific supervisory benchmarks for liquidity requirements, or does not apply
liquidity supervisory stress testing.
Qualitative assessment of institutions’ stress testing programmes
128. When assessing institutions’ stress testing programmes, competent authorities should
consider all relevant sources of information about stress testing programmes and
methodologies, including institutions’ own internal assess ments and validation or reviews
undertaken by independent internal control functions, as well as information and estimations
provided by third parties, where available.
129. Competent authorities should assess how institutions design, manage and oversee their
stress testing programmes and they should assess the adequacy of these programmes, by
taking into account in particular:
a. the institution’s ability and the infrastructure available, including with regard to data
availability and data aggregation, to implement the stress testing programme in individual
business lines and entities and across the group, where relevant;
b. the adequacy of possible interlinkages between solvency and liquidity stress tests;
c. the adequacy of the institutions’ assessment of stress testing programmes to determine
their effectiveness and robustness; and
d. the adequacy of the frequency of stress tests, having regard to the scope and type of the
stress test, the nature, scale, size and complexity of the activities of the institutions,
portfolio characteristics and macroeconomic environment.

[Page 64]
64
130. Competent authorities should also assess the use of stress test results in institutions’ risk
and strategic management, and in particular:
a. the extent to which stress testing is embedded in an institution’s risk management
framework and in the process of setting up the risk appetite and limits;
b. the involvement of senior management and of the management body in the stress
testing programme and the related internal reporting of the institution;
c. the integration of stress testing and its outcomes into decision -making throughout the
institution;
131. When assessing stress testing programmes, the results of stress tests and proposed
management actions, competent authorities should consider both idios yncratic and system -
wide perspectives. In particular, management actions should be primarily assessed from an
internal perspective with regard to their plausibility, considering the specificities of an
individual institution. Competent authorities should also consider management actions from a
system-wide perspective, as other institutions are likely to consider similar actions, which in a
system-wide context may be implausible.
132. When assessing management actions with an effect on an institution’s capital or general
financial position, competent authorities should consider their feasibility in stress situations
and the timelines for the implementation of the action. In particular, management actions
should be completed and implemented during the time horizon of the stress test. Competent
authorities may also consider, where relevant, management actions that will be completed
later than the time horizon of the stress test.
133. Competent authorities should take into account the effectiveness of institutions’ stress
testing programmes in identifying relevant business vulnerabilities and take this into
consideration when assessing institutions’ business model viability and sustainability of their
strategies (see Title 4).
134. When assessing stress testing programmes and th eir results in the case of cross -border
groups, competent authorities should consider the transferability of capital and liquidity
between the legal entities or business units during stressed conditions, as well as the
functioning of any established intra-group financial support arrangements, taking into account
the funding difficulties that might be expected in stressed conditions.
Quantitative assessment of institutions’ stress tests
135. Competent authorities, in addition to carrying out the qualitative ass essment specified
above, should assess and challenge the choice and use of scenarios, assumptions and
methodologies, and should assess in particular:

[Page 65]
65
a. their severity of scenarios, also taking into account the scenarios outlined in the
reverse stress testing , their occurrence probability and their relevance to the
business model of the institution;
b. whether the scenarios are severe but plausible, internally consistent and forward-
looking;
c. whether the scenarios address all major institution -specific vulnerabilities and
include all material products and business lines;
d. the impact of the assumptions on the outputs of stress tests.
136. When challenging scenarios, assumptions and the outcomes of ins titutions’ stress tests,
competent authorities should use, where appropriate, the outcomes, scenarios and
assumptions from supervisory stress tests, including relevant regional stress test exercises done
by various authorities, such as the EBA, the IMF and the ESCB/ESRB, as well the qualitative
assessment as specified above, to determine the extent to which the institution’s stress testing
programme and its outcomes can be relied on.
137. If competent authorities identify deficiencies in the design of the scenarios or assumptions
used by institutions, they may require institutions to rerun their stress tests, or some specific
parts of the stress testing programme using modified assumptions provided by the competent
authorities, or specific prescribed scenarios (e .g. the anchor scenarios defined in the EBA
Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing).
138. Competent authorities should assess the results of stress tests, in particular with regard to
stress tests performed in the context of capital and liquidity risk manag ement, including the
ones for ICAAP and ILAAP purposes (see also Section 5.7.2) and they should ensure that in a
stress scenario used for capital adequacy purposes the capital ratio is negatively affected as the
result of, for example, credit rating migrat ions, a reduction in net interest margins or trading
losses.
139. In their reviews of stress tests performed in the context of capital and liquidity risk
management, including for ICAAP and ILAAP purposes, competent authorities should carry out
a combined assessment of the impact of stress test outcomes on capital and liquidity needs, as
well as on other relevant regulatory requirements. To that end, competent authorities should
assess whether the institution is able to maintain the applicable TSCR, at all times, in an adverse
scenario and if it has identified a set of management actions to address any potential breaches
of TSCR.
140. Competent authorities should also consider the impact of stress tests on an institution’s
leverage ratio, as well as its eligible liabilities held for the purposes of minimum requirements
for eligible liabilities (MREL) as referred to in Directive 2014/59/EU.

[Page 66]
66
141. In the assessment of stress test results, competent authorities should also consider all
known future regulatory changes affecting institutions within the scope and time horizon of
the stress test exercise. Likewise, competent authorities should also consider all known changes
in future capital requirements (e.g. fully loaded assessments) when assessing stress test results
and business-model viability.
5.7.4 New products and significant changes
142. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has in place a well -
documented NPAP, approved by the management body, that addresses the development of
new markets, products and services, including their underlying processes and systems, and
significant changes to existing ones, as well as exceptional transactions.
143. Competent authorities should assess whether the risk management function and
compliance function are appropriately involved in approving new products or significant
changes to existin g products, processes and systems , and that approval of new products is
linked to the adequateness of respective controls.
5.8 Information and communication technologies and business
continuity management
144. In line with the EBA Guidelines on internal governance and the EBA Guidelines on ICT and
security risk managemen t24, competent authorities should assess whether the institution’s
information and communication technologies are effective and reliable and whether these
systems fully support risk data aggregation capabilities at normal times, as well as during times
of stress. In particular, competent authorities should assess whether the institution is at least
able to:
a. generate accurate, consistent, complete and reliable aggregated risk data for business
units and the entire institution;
b. capture and aggregate all material risk data across the institution;
c. generate aggregate and up -to-date risk data and risk reports in a timely manner with
sufficient frequency; and
d. generate adaptable aggregate risk data and risk reporting to meet a broad range of on -
demand requests from the management body or competent authorities, including ad hoc
requests due to changing internal or external needs.
145. Competent authorit ies should assess whether the institution has established effective
business continuity management with tested contingency and business continuity plans, as well
24 EBA Guidelines on ICT and security risk management (EBA/GL/2019/04).

[Page 67]
67
as disaster recovery plans for all its critical functions, including outsourced critical functions and
resources, and whether those plans can credibly recover these.
5.9 ML/TF risks and prudential concerns
146. When analysing the internal governance framework and institution -wide controls,
competent authorities should also take into account the assessments received from AML/CFT
supervisors, and evaluate whether these give rise to prudential concerns. This could be the case
in particular where findings point to material weaknesses in an institution’s AML/CFT systems
and controls. Conversely, where the compete nt authority’s assessment indicates the
shortcomings in an institution’s internal controls and governance framework and institution -
wide controls give rise to prudential concerns related to ML/TF risk, competent authorities
should share the outcome of that assessment with AML/CFT supervisors25.
147. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution’s overall governance
framework includes also the management of the ML/TF risks.
148. In line with the EBA Guidelines on internal governance26 and Joint ESMA and EBA Guidelines
on the assessment of the suitability of the members of the management body and key function
holders 27competent authorities should assess from a prudential perspective whether the
responsibilities of the management body with regard to ML/TF risks are being complied with.
Competent authorities should take into account any supplementary information received from
the AML/CFT supervisors following their assessment in line with the EBA Guidelines on policies
and procedures in relation to compliance management and the role and responsibilities of the
AML/CFT Compliance Officer28.
5.10 Recovery planning
149. To assess internal governance and institution-wide controls, competent authorities should
consider any findings and deficiencies identified in the assessment of recovery plans and
recovery planning arrangements conducted in accordance with Articles 6 and 8 of Directive
2014/59/EU.
150. Similarly, findings from the assessment of SREP elements, incl uding internal governance
and institution-wide control arrangements, should inform the assessment of recovery plans.
25 In accordance with the EBA AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines (EBA/GL/2021/15)
26 EBA Guidelines on internal governance under Directive 2013/36/EU (EBA/GL/2021/05).
27 Joint ESMA and EBA Guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of memb ers of the management body and key
function holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU (EBA/GL/2021/06).
28 EBA Guidelines on policies and procedures in relation to compliance management and the role and responsibilities of
the AML/CFT Compliance Officer under Article 8 and Chapter VI of Directive (EU) 2015/849 (EBA/GL/2022/05).

[Page 68]
68
5.11 Application at the consolidated level and implications for
group entities
151. At the consolidated level, in addition to the elements covered in the sections above,
competent authorities should assess whether:
a. the management body of the consolidating institution understands both the organisation
of the group and the roles of its different entities, and the links and relationships among
them;
b. the o rganisational and legal structure of the group – where relevant – is clear and
transparent, and suitable for the size and the complexity of the business and operations;
c. the institution has established an effective group -wide management information and
reporting system applicable to all business units and legal entities, and this information is
available to the management body of the institution’s parent undertaking on a timely
basis;
d. the management body of the consolidating institution has established consi stent group-
wide strategies, including a group wide risk strategy and appetite framework;
e. group risk management covers all material risks regardless of whether the risk arises from
entities not subject to consolidation (including SPVs, SPEs, property firms , legal
arrangements, entities managed on behalf of customers as trustee or nominee) and
establishes a comprehensive view on all risks;
f. the institution carries out regular stress testing covering all material risks and entities in
accordance with the EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing; and
g. the group-wide internal audit function is independent, has a group-wide risk based audit
plan, is appropriately staffed and resourced, has appropriate stature and has a direct
reporting line to the management body of the consolidating institution.
152. When conducting the assessment of internal governance and institution -wide controls at
subsidiary level, in addition to the elements listed in this title, competent authorities should
assess whether group-wide policies and procedures are implemented consistently at subsidiary
level and whether group entities have taken steps to ensure that their operations are compliant
with all applicable laws and regulations.
5.12 Summary of findings and scoring
153. Following the above assessment s, competent authorities should form a view on the
adequacy of the institution’s internal governance arrangements and institution-wide controls.

[Page 69]
69
This view should be reflected in a summary of findings, accompanied by a viability score based
on the considerations specified in Table 3.
Table 3. Supervisory considerations for assigning a score for internal governance and institution-
wide controls
Score Supervisory view Considerations
1 Deficiencies in internal governance
and institution -wide control
arrangements pose a low level of
risk to the viability of the institution.
• The institution has a robust and
transparent organisational structure with
clear responsibilities and separation of
risk-taking from risk management and
control functions.
• There is a sound corporate culture,
management of conflicts of interest and
whistleblowing processes.
• The composition and functioning of the
management body are appropriate.
• The time commitment of members of the
management body is appropriate and
they comply with the limitation on the
number of directorships, where relevant.
• The institution has adopted a diversity
policy that fosters a diverse board
composition and complies with the
targets set.
• The remuneration policy is in line with
the institution’s risk strategy and long -
term interests.
• The risk management framework and risk
management processes, including the
ICAAP, ILAAP, NPAP, stress testing
framework, capital planning and liquidity
planning, are appropriate.
• The internal control framework and
internal controls are appropriate.
• The risk management , compliance and
internal audit functions are independent
and have sufficient resources , and the
internal audit function operates
effectively in accordance with
established international standards and
requirements.
• Information and communication
technologies and business continuity
arrangements are appropriate.
• The recovery plan is credible and
recovery planning arrangements are
appropriate.

[Page 70]
70
Score Supervisory view Considerations
2 Deficiencies in internal governance
and institution -wide control
arrangements pose a medium-low
level of risk to the viability of the
institution.
• The institution has a largely robust and
transparent organisational structure with
clear responsibilities and separation of
risk-taking from risk management and
control functions.
• There is a largely sound corporate
culture, management of con flicts of
interest and whistleblowing processes.
• The composition and functioning of the
management body are largely
appropriate.
• The time commitment of members of
the management body is largely
appropriate, and, where relevant, they
comply with the limitation on the
number of directorships.
• The institution has adopted a diversity
policy that fosters a diverse board
composition, and largely complies with
the targets set or has implemented
appropriate measures to achieve the
targets defined in the policy.
• The remuneration policy is largely in line
with the institution’s risk strategy and
long-term interests.
• The risk management framework and risk
management processes, including the
ICAAP, ILAAP, NPAP, stress testing
framework, capital planning and liquidity
planning, are largely appropriate.
• The internal control framework and
internal controls are largely appropriate.
• The risk management, compliance and
internal audit functions are independent
and their operations are largely effective.
• Information and communication
technologies and business continuity
arrangements are largely appropriate.
• The recovery plan is largely credible. The
recovery planning arrangements are
largely appropriate.
3 Deficiencies in internal governance
and institution -wide control
arrangements pose a medium -high
• The institution’s organisational structure
and responsibilities are not fully
transparent and risk-taking is not fully
separated from risk management and
control functions.

[Page 71]
71
Score Supervisory view Considerations
level of risk to the viability of the
institution.
• There are doubts about the
appropriateness of the corporate
culture, management of conflicts of
interest and/or whistleblowing
processes.
• There are doubts about the
appropriateness of the composition and
functioning of the management body.
• There are doubts about the appropriate
time commitment of members of the
management body and where relevant
they do not comply with the limitation on
the number of directorships.
• The institution has not adopted a
diversity policy or has not put measures
in place to achieve an appropriate level of
diversity.
• There are concerns that the
remuneration policy may conflict with
the institution’s risk strategy and long -
term interests.
• There are doubts about the
appropriateness of the risk management
framework and risk management
processes, including the ICAAP, ILAAP,
NPAP, stress testing framework, capital
planning and/or liquidity planning.
• There are doubts about the
appropriateness of the internal control
framework and internal controls.
• There are doubts about the
independence and effective operation of
the risk management, compliance and
internal audit functions.
• There are doubts about the
appropriateness of informat ion and
communication technologies and
business continuity arrangements.
• The recovery plan was assessed as
potentially having material deficiencies
and/or having material impediments to
its implementation and supervisory
concerns have not been fully addres sed.
There are doubts about the
appropriateness of arrangements for
recovery planning.

[Page 72]
72
Score Supervisory view Considerations
4 Deficiencies in internal governance
and institution -wide control
arrangements pose a high level of
risk to the viability of the institution.
• The institution’s organisational structure
and responsibilities are not transparent
and risk-taking is not separated from risk
management and control functions.
• The corporate culture , management of
conflicts of interest and/ or
whistleblowing processes are
inappropriate.
• The composition and functioning of the
management body are inappropriate.
• The time commitment of members of the
management body is insufficient , and,
where relevant, they do not comply with
the limitation o n the number of
directorships.
• The institution has not adopted a
diversity policy, the management body is
not diverse and the institution has not
put measures in place to aim for an
appropriate level of diversity.
• The remuneration policy conflicts with
the institution’s risk s trategy and long -
term interests.
• The risk management framework and the
risk management processes, including
the ICAAP, ILAAP, NPAP, stress testing
framework, capital planning and /or
liquidity planning, are inappropriate.
• The risk management, compliance
and/or internal audit function is not
independent and/or the internal audit
functions are not operating in
accordance with established
international standards and
requirements; operations are not
effective.
• The internal control framework and
internal controls are inappropriate.
• The information systems and business
continuity arrangements are
inappropriate.
• The recovery plan was assessed as having
material deficiencies and/or having
material impediments to its
implementation and supervisory
concerns have not been fully addressed.

[Page 73]
73
Score Supervisory view Considerations
The recovery planning arrangements are
inappropriate.

[Page 74]
74
Assessing risks to capital
6.1 General considerations
154. Competent authorities should assess and score the risks to capital that have been identified
as material for the institution.
155. The purpose of this title is to provide common methodologies to be considered for
assessing individual risks and risk management and controls. It is not intended to be exhaustive
and gives leeway to competent authorities to take into accou nt other additional criteria that
may be deemed relevant based on their experience and the specific features of the institution.
156. This title provides competent authorities with guidelines for the assessment and scoring of
the following risks to capital:
a. credit and counterparty risk;
b. market risk;
c. operational risk;
d. interest rate risk from non-trading activities (IRRBB).
157. The title also identifies a set of subcategories within each risk category above, which need
to be taken into account when risks to capital are assessed. Depending on the materiality of
any these subcategories to a particular institution, they can be assessed and scored individually.
158. The decision on ma teriality depends on the supervisory judgement. However, for FX
lending risk, in light of the ESRB Recommendation on lending in foreign currencies29, materiality
should be determined taking into account the following threshold:
Loans denominated in foreign currency to unhedged borrowers constitute at least 10% of an
institution’s total loan book (total loans to non-financial corporations and households), where
such a total loan book constitutes at least 25% of the institution’s total assets.
159. Competent authorities should also assess other risks that are identified as material to a
specific institution but are not listed above (e.g. pension risk, reputational risk, strategic and
business risk, step-in risk, intra- and inter-risk concentration). The following may assist with the
identification process:
a. drivers of TREA;
29 ESRB Recommendation on lending in foreign currencies (ESRB/2011/1), OJ C 342, 22.11.2011, p. 1.

[Page 75]
75
b. risks identified in the institution’s ICAAP;
c. risks arising from the institution’s business model (including those identified by
other institutions operating a similar business model);
d. information stemming from the monitoring of key indicators;
e. findings and observations from internal or external audit reports; and
f. recommendations and guidelines issued by the EBA, as well as warnings and
recommendations issued by macroprudential authorities or the ESRB.
160. The above elements should also be taken into account by competent authorities when they
are planning the intensity of their supervisory activity in relation to the assessment of a specific
risk.
161. For credit , market and operational risk , competent authorities should verify the
institution’s compliance with the minimum requirements specified in the relevant EU and
national implementing legislation . However, these guidelines extend the scope of the
assessment beyond those minimum requirements to allow competent authorities to form a
comprehensive view on risks to capital.
162. When evaluating risks to capital, competent authorities should also consider the potential
impact of funding cost risk following the methodology included in Title 8 and may decide on
the necessity of measures to mitigate this risk.
163. In their implementation of the methodologies specified in this title, competent authorities
should identify relevant quantitative indicators and other metrics, which could also be used to
monitor key indicators, as specified in Title 3.
164. For each material risk, competent authorities should assess and reflect in the risk score:
a. inherent risk (risk exposures); and
b. the quality and effectiveness of risk management and controls.
165. This assessment flow is represented in Figure 4 below.

[Page 76]
76
Figure 4. Assessment workflow for risks to capital
166. When performing the ir assessments, competent authorities should use all available
information sources , including regulatory reporting, ad hoc reporting agreed with the
institution, the institution’s internal metrics and reports (e.g. internal audit report, risk
management reports, information from the ICAAP), on-site inspection reports and external
reports (e.g. the institution’s communications to investors, rating agencies). While the
assessment is intended to be institution-specific, comparison with peers should be considered
to identify potential exposure to risks to capital. For such purposes, peers should be defined on
a risk-by-risk basis and might differ from those identified for BMA or other analyses.
167. In the assessment of risks to capital, competent authorities should also evaluate the
accuracy and prudency of the calculation of minimum own fund requirements to identify
situations where minimum own funds calculations may underestimate the actual level of risk.
This assessment would inform the determination of additional own funds requirements as
provided in Section 7.2.3.
168. The outcome of the assessment of each material risk should be reflected in a summary of
findings that provides an explanation of the main risk drivers, and a risk score, as specified in
the following sections.
6.2 Assessment of credit and counterparty risk
6.2.1 General considerations
169. Competent authorities should assess credit risk arising from all banking book exposures
(including off-balance sheet items). They should also assess the counterparty credit risk and the
settlement risk that could fall under both banking and trading books.
170. In assessing credit risk , competent authorities should consider all the components that
determine potential credit losses , and in particular: the probability of a credit event (i .e.
default), or correlated credit events , that mainly concerns the borrowers and their ability to
repay relevant obligations; the size of exposures subject to credit risk; and the recovery rate of
Assessment of
risks management
and controls
Assessment of
inherent individual
risks
Assessment of
individual risks and
controls
Risk score
Inherent risk
assessment
Risk
management
and controls
assessment

[Page 77]
77
the credit exposures in the event of borrowers defaulting. For all these components, competent
authorities should take into account the possibility that these components may deteriorate
over time and worsen compared to expected outcomes.
171. In addition, competent authorities should also pay attention to whether ML/TF risks are
considered within the context of the credit-granting process, including whether the institution
has systems and controls in place to ensure funds used to repay loans are from legitimate
sources in accordance with the EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring.30
6.2.2 Assessment of inherent credit risk
172. Through the assessment of inherent credit risk , competent authorities should determine
the main drivers of the institution’s credit risk exposure and evaluate the significance of the
prudential impact of this risk for the institution. The assessment of inherent credit risk should
therefore be structured around the following main steps:
a. preliminary assessment;
b. assessment of the nature and composition of the credit portfolio;
c. assessment of portfolio credit quality;
d. assessment of the level and quality of credit risk mitigation; and
e. assessment of the level of provisions and of credit valuation adjustments (CVAs).
173. Competent authorities should assess credit risk in both current and prospective terms.
Competent authorities should combine the analysis of the current portfolio’s credit risk with
the assessment of the institution’s credit risk strategy, credit risk appetite and credit risk limits
(potentially as part of the wider assessment of strategy carried out as part of the BMA).
Competent authorities should also consider how the expected, as well as the stressed,
macroeconomic developments could affect those element s and ultimately the institution’s
earnings and own funds.
174. Competent authorities should primarily conduct the assessment at both portfolio and
asset-class level. Where relevant, competent authorities should also conduct a more granular
assessment, potentially at the level of single borrowers or transactions. Competent authorities
may also use sampling techniques when assessing portfolio risk.
175. Competent authorities may perform the assessment vertically (i.e. by considering all the
dimensions for relevant sub-portfolios) or horizontally (i.e. by considering one dimension, for
example credit quality, for the overall portfolio).
30 EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring (EBA/GL/2020/06)

[Page 78]
78
Preliminary assessment
176. To determine the scope of the assessment of credit risk, competent authorities should first
identify the sources of credit risk to which the institution is or m ay be exposed. To do so ,
competent authorities should leverage the knowledge gained from the asse ssment of other
SREP elements, from the comparison of the institution’s position to peers and from any other
supervisory activities.
177. As a minimum, competent authorities should consider the following:
a. the credit risk strategy and appetite and relevant limits;
b. the own funds requirement for credit risk compared to the total own funds
requirement, and – where relevant – the internal capital allocated for credit risk
compared to the total internal capital, including the historical change in this figure
and forecasts, if available;
c. the nature, size, composition and quality of the institution’s on - and off-balance
sheet credit-related items;
d. the level and change over time of impairments and write -offs and of the default
rates of the credit portfolio; and
e. the risk-adjusted performance of the credit portfolio.
178. Competent authorities should perform the preliminary analysis considering the change in
the above over time to form an informed view of the main drivers of the institution’s credit risk.
179. Competent authorities should focus the ir assessments on those drivers and portfolios
deemed the most material.
Nature and composition of the credit portfolio
180. Competent authorities should assess the nature of the credit exposures (i.e. the types of
borrowers and exposures) to identify the underlying risk factors and they should analyse the
composition of the institution’s credit portfolio. Competent authorities should perform this
analysis in both current and prospective terms, in light of the general macroeconomic situation.
181. In performing this assessment, competent authorities should also consider how the nature
of credit risk exposure can affect the size of exposure (e.g. credit lines/undrawn commitments
drawn down by borrowers, foreign currency denomination, etc.), taking into consideration the
institution’s legal capacity to unilaterally cancel undrawn amounts of committed credit
facilities.

[Page 79]
79
182. To assess the nature of credit risk , competent authorities should consider at least the
following subcategories of credit ri sk by carrying out a more detailed assessment of those
subcategories which are considered most relevant for the institution:
a. credit concentration risk;
b. counterparty credit risk and settlement risk;
c. country risk;
d. credit risk from securitisations;
e. FX lending risk;
f. specialised lending;
g. equity risk in the banking book;
h. real estate risk; and
i. model risk for regulatory approved models.
Credit concentration risk
183. Competent authorities should form a view on the degree of credit concentration risk , as
referred to in Article 81 of Directive 2013/36/EU, to which the institution is exposed .
Specifically, competent authorities should assess the risk that the institution will incur
significant credit losses stemming from a concentration of exposures to a small group of
borrowers, to a set of borrowers with similar default behaviour or to highly correlated financial
assets.
184. Competent authorities should conduct this assessment by considering different categories
of credit concentration risk, including:
a. single-name concentrations (including a client or group of connected clients as
defined for large exposures);
b. sectoral concentrations;
c. geographical concentrations;
d. product concentration; and
e. collateral and guarantees concentration.

[Page 80]
80
185. To identify credit concentrations, competent authorities should consider the common
drivers of credit risk across exposures and should focus on those exposures that tend to exhibit
similar behaviour (i.e. high correlation).
186. Competent authorities should pay particular attent ion to hidden sources of credit
concentration risk that can materialise under stressed conditions, when the level of credit risk
correlation can increase compared to normal conditions and when additional credit exposures
can arise from off-balance sheet items.
187. For groups, competent authorities should consider the credit concentration risk that can
result from consolidation, which may be not evident at an individual level.
188. When assessing credit concentrations, c ompetent authorities should consider the
possibility of overlaps (e.g. a high concentration to a specific government will probably lead to
a country concentration and single-name concentration), and should therefore avoid applying
a simple aggregation of the different types of credit concentration, and should instead consider
underlying drivers.
189. To assess the level of concentration, competent authorities can use different measures and
indicators, the most common being the Herfindahl-Hirschman Index (HHI) and Gini coefficients,
which may then be included in more or less complex methodologies to estimate the additional
credit risk impact.
Counterparty credit and settlement risks
190. Competent authorities should assess the counterparty credit risk arising from exposures to
derivatives and securities financing transactions and settlement risks faced by institutions.
191. For this assessment, the following aspects should be considered, as relevant:
a. the quality of counterparties and relevant CVAs, see also Section 6.3;
b. the complexity of transactions;
c. the wrong -way risk arising when the exposure to a counterparty is adversely
correlated with the credit quality of that counterparty;
d. the exposure to counterparty credit and settlement risks in terms of both current
market values and nominal amount, compared to the overall credit exposure and
to own funds;
e. the proportion of transactions processed through financial market infrastructures
(FMIs) that provide payment versus delivery settlement;
f. the proportion of transactions to central counterparties (CCPs) and the
effectiveness of loss protection mechanisms for them , the proportion of

[Page 81]
81
transactions to CCPs established in third countries, the effectiveness of loss
protection mechanisms for them, and how any excessive exposure to non-EU CCPs
is reduced, in particular in the context of Commission Implementing decision (EU)
2020/1308 of 21 September 2020 31 to give financial market participants until 30
June 2022 to reduce their exposure to UK CCPs;
g. the proportion of non-centrally cleared OTC transactions and the effectiveness of
loss protection mechanisms for them; and
h. the existence, significance, effectiveness and enforceability of netting agreements.
Country risk
192. Competent authorities should assess:
a. the degree of concentration within all types of exposures to country risk, including
sovereign exposures, in proportion to the whole institution’s credit portfolio (per
obligor and amount);
b. the economic strength and stability of the borrower’s country and its track record
in terms of punctual payment and occurrence of serious default events;
c. the risk of other forms of sovereign intervention that can materially impair the
creditworthiness of borrowers (e.g. deposit freezes, expropriation or punitive
taxation);
d. the risk arising from a potential event (e.g. a natural or social/political event)
affecting the whole country to lead to default by a large group of debtors (collective
debtor risk); and
e. the transfer risk linked to cross-border foreign currency lending for material cross-
border lending and exposures in foreign currencies.
While country risk should be reflected under the credit risk, its assessment may also
inform the analysis of other types of risk.
Credit risk from securitisation
193. Competent authorities should assess the credit risk related to securitisations wher e
institutions act as originators, investors, sponsors or credit-enhancement providers.
31 Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2020/1308 determining, for a limited period of time, that the regulatory
framework applicable to central counterparties in the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland is equivalent,
in accordance with Regulation (EU) No 648/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council.

[Page 82]
82
194. To appreciate the nature of relevant exposures and their potential development,
competent authorities should:
a. understand the strategy, risk appetite and business motivations of institutions in
terms of securitisations; and
b. analyse securitisation exposures taking into consideration both the role played and
the seniority of tranches held by institutions , as well as the type of securitisation
(e.g. traditional vs. synthetic, securitisation vs. re-securitisation).
195. In assessing the credit risk arising from securitisation exposures, where they are considered
material, competent authorities should assess, as a minimum:
a. the appropriateness of allocation of securitisation exposures to the banking book
and trading book and the consistency with the institution’s securitisation strategy;
b. whether the appropriate regulatory treatment is applied to securitisations;
c. the rating and the performance of the securitisation tranches held by the
institution, as well as the nature, composition and quality of the underlying assets;
d. the consistency of the capital relief with the actual risk transfer for originated
securitisations. Competent authorities should also verify whether the institution
provides any form of implicit (non -contractual) support for the transactions and
the potential impact on own funds for credit risk;
e. whether there is a clear distinction between drawn and undrawn amount s for
liquidity facilities provided to the securitisation vehicle; and
f. the existence of contingency plans for Asset-Backed Commercial Paper conduits
managed by the institution in the event that an issuance of commercial paper is
not possible because of liquidity conditions, and the impact on the total credit risk
exposure of the institution.
FX lending risk
196. Competent authorities should assess the existence and materiality of the additional credit
risk arising from FX lending exposures to unhedged retail and SME borrowers .In particular,
competent authorities should assess any non -linear relationship between m arket risk and
credit risk where exchange rates (market risk) may have a disproportional impact on the credit
risk of an institution’s FX loans portfolio. Where relevant, competent authorities should extend
the scope of this assessment to other types of cu stomers that are unhedged. In particular,
competent authorities should assess the higher credit risk arising from:

[Page 83]
83
a. a material increase in both the outstanding value of debt and the flow of payments
to service such debt; and
b. an increase in the outstanding v alue of debt compared to the value of collateral
assets denominated in the domestic currency.
197. In evaluating FX lending risk, where it is considered material, competent authorities should
assess:
a. the type of exchange-rate regime and how this could affect the changes in the FX
rate between domestic and foreign currencies;
b. the institution’s risk management of FX lending , measurement and control
frameworks, policies and procedures, including the extent to which they cover non-
linear relation ships between market and credit risk . In particular, competent
authorities should assesses whether:
i. the institution explicitly identifies its FX lending risk appetite and operates
within the specified thresholds;
ii. the FX lending risk is taken into account when borrowers are assessed and
FX loans are underwritten also considering the guidance for
creditworthiness assessment of borrowers applying for foreign currency
loans as specified in the EBA Guidelines on loan or igination and
monitoring32;
iii. the FX lending risk, including risk concentration in one or more currencies,
is appropriately addressed in the ICAAP;
iv. the institution periodically reviews the hedging status of borrowers;
v. the impact of exchange rate movements is taken into account in default
probabilities;
c. the sensitivity impact of exchange rate movements on borrowers’ credit
ratings/scoring and debt-servicing capacities; and
d. possible concentrations of lending activity in a single foreign currency or in a limited
number of highly correlated foreign currencies.
Specialised lending
198. Competent authorities should assess specialised lending separately from other lending
activities since the risk of such exposures lies in the profitability of the asset or project financed
32 EBA Guidelines on Loan origination and monitoring (EBA/GL/2020/06).

[Page 84]
84
(e.g. commercial real estate, energy plant, shipping, commodities, etc.) rather than the
borrower (which is generally a special purpose vehicle).
199. Generally, these exposures tend to be of a significant size relative to the portfolio and so
represent a source of credit concentration, of long maturity, which makes it difficult to make
reliable projections of profitability.
200. In assessing the specialised lending exposures, where they are considered material, ,
competent authorities should consider:
a. the profitability of the projects and the conservativeness of the assumptions
underlying the business plans (including the credit risk of the main customers);
b. the impact of change s in regulation, especially for subsidised sectors, on future
cash flows;
c. the impact of changing market demand , where relevant, and the existence of a
market for the potential future sale of the object financed;
d. the existence of a syndicate or of other lenders sharing the credit risk; and
e. any form of guarantee pledged by the sponsors.
Equity risk in the banking book
201. Competent authorities should assess the risk of decline in the value of the institution’s
equity investments and ensure that this risk is appropriately captured by the institution’s risk
framework. Such an assessment should particularly focus, where relevant, on participation risk
in strategic holdings (both insurance and non-insurance).
Real-estate risk
202. Competent authorities should assess the risk of decline in the value of the institution’s real
estate investments and ensure that this risk is appropria tely captured by the institution’s risk
framework. Such an assessment should also focus, where relevant, on the value of financial
instruments linked to real estate assets (e.g. real estate investment trusts, REITs).
Model risk for regulatory approved models
203. In cases where institutions are using regulatory approved internal models for the purpose
of calculating own funds requirements for credit risk, competent authorities should monitor
whether the institution continues to fulfil the minimum requirements and ensure that related
own funds requirements are not underestimated. The assessment of model risk may be based
on the insights gained in other supervisory actions, including those carried out in accordance
with Article 101 of Directive 2013/36/EU.

[Page 85]
85
Assessment of the portfolio credit quality
204. In assessing inherent credit risk, competent authorities should consider the quality of the
credit portfolio, by carrying out an analysis to distinguish between performing, non-performing
and forborne exposure categories, taking into account requirements of the EBA Guidelines on
management of non-performing and forborne exposures33.
205. Competent authorities should assess the overall credit quality at portfolio level and the
different quality grades within each of the above categories to determine the institution’s
overall credit risk. As part of this assessment competent authorities should analyse default and
migration risk by exposure classes, taking into account trends in the credit quality over time,
and they should consider whether the actual credit quality is consistent with the stated risk
appetite, and establish reasons for any deviations.
206. When assessing portfolio credit quality , competent author ities should pay particular
attention to the adequacy of the classification of credit exposures and assess the impact of
potential misclassification, with the subsequent delay in the provisioning and recognition of
losses by the institution. In conducting this assessment, competent authorities may use peer
analysis and benchmark portfolios, where available. Competent authorities may also use
sampling of loans when assessing portfolio credit quality.
Performing exposures
207. In evaluating the credit quality of performing exposures, competent authorities should
consider the change in the portfolio in terms of composition, size and creditworthiness, its
profitability and the risk of future deterioration , by analysing the followi ng elements, where
available:
a. borrowers’ credit grade distribution (e.g. by internal and/or external ratings or
other information suitable for measuring creditworthiness, such as leverage ratio,
ratio of revenues devoted to the payment of instalments, etc.);
b. growth rates by type s of borrowers, sectors and products and consistency with
credit risk strategies;
c. sensitivity of borrowers’ credit grades, or more generally of borrowers’ repayment
capacities, to the economic cycle;
d. historical migration rates across credit grades, delinquency and default rates for
different time horizons; and
e. profitability (e.g. credit spread vs. credit losses).
33 EBA/GL/2018/06

[Page 86]
86
208. In performing these analyses, competent authorities should consider both the number of
obligors and the relevant amounts/volumes and take into account the level of portfolio
concentration.
Forborne exposures
209. Competent authorities should assess the extent of forborne exposures, and the potential
losses that may stem from them. As a minimum, this should include:
a. the forbearance rates per portfolio and changes over time, also compared to peers;
b. the forbearance rates for different types of forbearance measures, including time
horizons of the measures;
c. the level and quality of collateralisation of forborne exposures; and
d. the migration rates of forborne exposures to performing and non -performing
exposures, also compared with peers.
Non-performing exposures
210. Competent authorities should assess the materiality of non -performing exposures,
including per portfolio and the potential losses that may stem from them. As a minimum, this
should include:
a. the non -performing rates and coverage per portfolio, sector, geography and
changes over time, also taking into account the changes in the portfolios (e.g.
growing portfolios vs expirin g portfolios) and strategy with regard to non -
performing exposures (e.g. recent sales of non-performing exposures);
b. the distribution of the exposures across classes of non -performing exposures (i.e.
past-due, doubtful, etc.);
c. the types and values of collateral, where relevant;
d. the migration rates from non -performing classes to performing, forborne
exposures, and across non-performing classes;
e. foreclosed assets and changes over time;
f. historical recovery rates by portfolio, sector, geography or type of collat eral and
the duration of the recovery process; and
g. the time since exposures were classified as non -performing, analysed by time
buckets (vintage).

[Page 87]
87
211. In conducting the above analysis, competent authorities should employ peer analysis and
use benchmark portfolios (i.e. portfolios of borrowers common to groups of institutions) where
appropriate and possible.
Assessment of the level and quality of credit risk mitigation
212. To assess the potential impact of credit risk on the institution, competent a uthorities
should also consider the level and quality of guarantees (including credit derivatives) and of
available collateral that would mitigate credit losses where credit events occur, including those
not accepted as eligible credit risk mitigation techniques for own funds calculations.
213. Specifically, competent authorities should consider:
a. the coverage provided by collateral and guarantees by portfolio, borrower type,
rating, sector and other relevant aspects;
b. collateral values, for performing and non-performing exposures, including to what
degree they meet the requirements of the EBA Guidelines on management of non-
performing and forborne exposures (for collateral used to secure non -performing
exposures) and EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitor ing (for all
collateral);
c. historical recovery ratios by type and amount of collateral and guarantees; and
d. the materiality of the dilution risk (see Article 4 of Regulation (EU) 575/2013) for
purchased receivables.
214. Competent authorities should also assess the materiality of the residual risk (see Article 80
of Directive 2013/36/EU) and in particular:
a. the adequacy and enforceability of collateral agreements and of guarantees;
b. the timing and the ability to realise coll ateral and execute guarantees under the
national legal framework;
c. the liquidity and volatility in asset values for collateral;
d. the recoverable value of collateral under any credit enforcement actions (e.g.
foreclosure procedures); and
e. where relevant, the g uarantors’ creditworthiness following the requirements of
the EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring.
215. Competent authorities should also assess the concentration of guarantors and collateral,
as well as the correlation with borrowers’ creditworth iness (i.e. wrong -way risk) and the
potential impact in terms of the effectiveness of protection.

[Page 88]
88
Assessment of the level of loan loss provisions and credit valuation adjustments
216. Competent authorities should assess whether the level of loan loss provisions and credit
valuation adjustments are appropriate for the quality of the exposures and, where relevant, for
the level of collateral. Competent authorities should assess:
a. whether the level of loan loss provisions is consistent with the level of risk in
different portfolios, over time and compared with the institution’s relevant peers;
b. whether the credit valuation adjustments to derivatives’ market values reflect the
creditworthiness of relevant counterparties;
c. whether accounting loan loss provisions are in line with applicable accounting
principles and are assessed as sufficient to cover expected losses;
d. whether non -performing, forborne exposures and foreclosed assets have been
subject to sufficient loan loss provisions, taking into account the level of existing
collateral and the vintage of such exposures and applicable legal requirements for
the minimum loss coverage of non-performing exposures; and
e. whether loan loss provisions are consistent with historical losses and relevant
macroeconomic developments and reflect any changes to relevant regulations (e.g.
foreclosure, repossession, creditor protection, etc.).
217. Where deemed necessary, competent authorities should use on-site inspections or other
appropriate supervisory actions to assess whether or not the level of loan loss provisioning and
risk coverage is adequate, by assessing a sample of loans, for example.
218. Competent authorities should also take into consideration any findings r aised by internal
and external auditors, where available.
Stress testing
219. When evaluating the inherent credit risk of an institution, competent authorities should
take into account the results of stress tests performed by the institution to identify any
previously unidentified sources of credit risk, such as those emerging from changes in credit
quality, credit concentrations, collateral value and credit exposure during a stressed period.
6.2.3 Assessment of credit risk management and controls
220. To achieve a comprehensive understanding of the institution’s credit risk profile,
competent authorities should also review the governance and risk management framework
underlying its credit activities throughout the life cycle of a loan. To this end, competent
authorities should assess the following elements, also having regard to the EBA Guidelines on
loan origination and monitoring and the EBA Guidelines on management of non -performing
and forborne exposures:

[Page 89]
89
a. the credit risk strategy and appetite;
b. the organisational framework;
c. policies and procedures;
d. risk identification, measurement, management, monitoring and reporting; and
e. the internal control framework.
221. For the institutions subject to the application of the NPE (reduction) strategies and the
associated governance and operational guidance in accordance with the EBA Guide lines on
management of non -performing and forborne exposures, competent authorities should also
assess whether institutions meet specific requirements set out in those guidelines for such
strategies and their operationalisation, including with respect to m eeting the consumer
protection obligations.
Credit risk strategy and appetite
222. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has a sound, clearly
formulated and documented credit risk appetite, strategy and limits approved by the
management body. For this assessment, among other factors, competent authorities should
take into account:
a. whether the management body clearly expresses the credit risk strategy and
appetite, as well as the process for their review;
b. whether senior management properly i mplements and monitors the credit risk
strategy approved by the management body, ensuring that the institution’s
activities are consistent with the established strategy, that written procedures are
drawn up and implemented, and that responsibilities are cl early and properly
assigned;
c. whether the institution’s credit and counterparty risk strategy reflects the
institution’s appetite levels for credit risk and whether it is consistent with the
overall risk appetite;
d. whether the institution’s credit risk strategy is appropriate for the institution given
its:
• business model;
• overall risk appetite;
• market environment and role in the financial system; and

[Page 90]
90
• financial condition, funding capacity and adequacy of own funds;
e. whether the institution’s credit risk strategy covers its credit-granting activities and
collateral management, as well as the management of non-performing exposures,
and whether this strategy supports risk-based decision-making, reflecting aspects
that may include, for example, exposure type (commercial, consumer, real estate,
sovereign), economic sector, geographical location, currency and maturity,
including concentration limits;
f. whether the institution’s credit risk strategy broadly covers all the activities of the
institution where credit risk can be significant;
g. whether the institution’s credit risk strategy takes into account cyclical aspects of
the economy , including under stress conditions, and the resulting shifts in the
composition of the credit risk portfolio; and
h. whether the institution has an appropriate framework in place to ensure that the
credit risk strategy is effectively communicated to all relevant staff.
Organisational framework
223. Competent authorities should ass ess whether the institution has an appropriate
organisational framework and governance arrangements to enable effective credit risk taking,
management, measurement and control, with sufficient (both qualitative and quantitative)
human and technical resourc es to carry out the required tasks. Among other factors, they
should take into account whether:
a. there are clear lines of responsibility for taking on, measuring, monitoring,
managing and reporting credit risk;
b. the credit risk control and monitoring systems are subject to independent review
and there is a clear separation between risk-takers and risk managers;
c. the risk management, measurement and control functions cover credit risk
throughout the institution; and
d. the staff invo lved in credit -granting activities, credit risk management and
management of NPEs, in particular NPE workout units (both in business areas and
in management and control areas) have appropriate skills and experience to
perform their tasks.
Policies and procedures
224. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has appropriate policies for
the credit granting, identification, management, measurement and control of credit risk,
including collateral valuation, the recovery or sales processes, and whether such policies are in

[Page 91]
91
line with the EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring and the EBA Guidelines on
management of non -performing and forborne exposures. For this assessment, among other
factors, competent authorities should take into account whether:
a. the management body approves the policies for managing, measuring and
controlling credit risk and discusses and reviews them regularly, in line with risk
strategies;
b. senior management is responsible for drawing up and implementing the policies
and procedures for managing, measuring and controlling credit risk, as defined by
the management body;
c. the policies and procedures are sound and consistent with the credit risk strategy,
and cover all the main businesses and processes relevant to managing, measuring
and controlling credit risk, in particular:
• credit granting and pricing: for example, borrowers, guarantors and
collateral eligibility; credit limits; selection of FMIs, CCPs and
correspondent banks; types of credit facilities available; terms and
conditions (including collateral and netting agreements requirement)
to be applied;
• credit risk measurement and monitoring: for example, criteria for
identifying groups of connected counterparties; criteria for assessing
borrowers’ creditworthiness and collat eral evaluation and frequency
for their review; criteria for quantifying impairments, credit valuation
adjustments and provisions; and
• credit management: for example, criteria for reviewing products,
terms and conditions; criteria for applying forbearance practice s or
restructuring; criteria for loan classification and management of NPLs;
d. the policies and procedures also specify how ML/TF risks to which the institution is
exposed as a result of the credit granting activities are identified, ass essed and
managed both at the level of the business (in terms of types of customers served,
lending products provided, geographies to which they are exposed and distribution
channels used) and at the level of the individual relationship (considering the
purpose of the credit, the extent to which the counterparty gives rise to ML/TF risk,
and the legitimacy of the source of funds used to repay the credit);
e. such policies are compliant with relevant regulations and adequate for the nature
and complexity of the institution’s activities, and enable a clear understanding of
the credit risk inherent to the different products and activities under the scope of
the institution;
f. such policies are clearly formalised, communicated and applied consistently across
the institution; and

[Page 92]
92
g. these policies are applied consistently across banking groups and allow proper
management of shared borrowers and counterparties.
Risk identification, measurement, monitoring and reporting
225. Competent authorities should assess whether the insti tution has an appropriate
framework for identifying, understanding, measuring, monitoring and reporting credit risk, in
line with the institution’s size and complexity, and that this framework is compliant with the
requirements of the relevant EU and national implementing legislation.
226. In this regard, competent authorities should consider whether the institutions have
adequate data infrastructure that meets the requirements of the EBA Guidelines on loan
origination and monitoring, and of the EBA Guidelines on management of non-performing and
forborne exposures and whether analytical techniques are appropriate to enable the institution
to adequately manage their credit risk, and to fulfil supervisory reporting requirements, and to
detect, measure and regularly monitor the credit risk inherent in all on- and off-balance-sheet
activities (where relevant at group level), in particular with regard to:
a. the borrower/counterparty/transaction’s credit risk and eligibility;
b. credit exposures (irrespective of their nature) of borrowers and, where relevant, of
groups of connected borrowers;
c. guarantee and collateral coverage (including netting agreements) and eligibility of
this coverage;
d. ongoing compliance with the contractual terms and agreements (covenants);
e. unauthorised overdrafts and conditions for reclassification of credit exposures; and
f. relevant sources of credit concentration risk.
227. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has a clear understanding of
the credit risk related to the different types of borrowers, transactions and credit granted.
228. They should also assess whether the institution has appropriate s kills, systems and
methodologies to measure this risk at borrower/transaction and portfolio level, in accordance
with the size, nature, composition and complexity of the institution’s activities involving credit
risk. In particular, competent authorities should ensure that such systems and methodologies:
a. enable the institution to differentiate between different levels of borrower and
transaction risk;
b. provide a sound and prudent estimation of the level of credit risk and of collateral
value with a distinct focus on exposures secured by residential and commercial
immovable property collateral;

[Page 93]
93
c. identify and measure credit concentration risk s (single -name, sectoral,
geographical, etc.);
d. enable the institution to project credit risk estimates for planning purposes and for
stress testing;
e. enable the institution to determine the level of provision and credit valu ation
adjustments required to cover expected and incurred losses; and
f. where material, aim to capture those risk elements not covered or not fully covered
by the requirements of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
229. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution’s management body and
senior management understand the assumptions underlying the credit measurement system
and whether they are aware of the degree of relevant model risk.
230. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has undertaken stress testing
to understand the impact of adverse events on its credit risk exposures and on the adequacy of
its credit risk provisioning. They should take into account:
a. stress test frequency;
b. relevant risk factors identified;
c. assumptions underlying the stress scenario; and
d. the i nternal u se of stress testing outcomes for capital planning and credit risk
strategies.
231. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has defined and implemented
continuous and effective monitoring of credit risk exposures (including credit concentra tion)
throughout the institution , amongst others, by means of specific indicators and relevant
triggers to provide effective early warning alerts.
232. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has implemented regular
reporting of credit risk exposures, including the outcome of stress testing, to the management
body, senior management and the relevant credit risk managers.
Internal control framework
233. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has a strong and
comprehensive control framework and sound safeguards to mitigate its credit risk in line with
its credit risk strategy and appetite and whether such a control framework is line with the
requirements of the EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring and Guidelines on
management of non -performing and forborne exposures. For this purpose, among other
factors, competent authorities should pay particular attention to whether:

[Page 94]
94
a. the scope covered by the institution ’s control functions includes all consolidated
entities, all geographical locations and all credit activities;
b. there are internal controls, operating limits and other practices aimed at keeping
credit risk exposures within levels acceptable to the institution, in accordance with
the parameters set by the manageme nt body and senior management and the
institution’s risk appetite;
c. the institution has appropriate internal controls and practices to ensure that
breaches of and exceptions to policies, procedures and limits are reported in a
timely manner to the appropriate level of management for action; and
d. there are checks in place to identify, assess and manage ML/TF risks to which the
institution is exposed as a result of the credit-granting activities.
234. Competent authorities should assess the limit system, including whether:
a. the limit system is adequate for the complexity of the institution’s organisation and
credit activities, as well as its capability for measuring and managing credit risk;
b. the limits established are absolute or whether breaches of limits are possib le. In
the latter case, the institution’s policies should clearly describe the period of time
during which and the specific circumstances under which such breaches of limits
are possible;
c. the institution has procedures to keep credit managers up to date with regard to
their limits; and
d. the institution has adequate procedures to update its limits regularly (e.g. for
consistency with changes in strategies).
235. Competent authorities should also a ssess the functionality of the internal audit function.
To this end, they should assess whether:
a. the institution conducts internal audits of the credit risk management framework
on a periodic basis;
b. the internal audit function covers the main elements of credit risk management,
measurement and controls across the institution; and
c. the internal audit function is effective in determining adherence to internal policies
and relevant external regulations and addressing any deviations from either.
236. For institutions adopting an internal approach to determin ing minimum own funds
requirements for credit risk, competent authorities should also assess whether the internal
validation process is sound and effective in challenging model assumptions and identifying any

[Page 95]
95
potential shortcomings with respect to credit risk modelling, credit risk quantification and the
credit risk management system and to other relevant minimum requirements as specified in
the relevant EU and national implementing legislation.
6.2.4 Summary of findings and scoring
237. Following the above assessment, competent auth orities should form a view on the
institution’s credit and counterparty risk. This view should be reflected in a summary of
findings, accompanied by a risk score based on the considerations specified in Table 4. If, based
on the materiality of certain risk subcategories, the competent authority decides to assess and
score them individually, the guidance provided in this table should be applied, as far as possible,
by analogy.
Table 4. Supervisory considerations for assigning a credit and counterparty risk score
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
1
There is a low risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The nature and composition of
credit risk exposure implies non-
material risk/very low risk.
• Exposure to complex products
and transactions is not
material/very low.
• The level of credit concentration
risk is not material/very low.
• The level of forborne and non -
performing exposures is not
material/very low.
• The credit risk posed by
performing exposures is not
material/very low.
• The level of coverage of
provisions and of credit valuation
adjustments is very high.
• The level of coverage and quality
of guarantees and collateral are
very high.
• Risk mana gement and
controls are adequate
with respect to the
requirements set out in
the EBA Guidelines on
loan origination and
monitoring and Guidelines
on management of non -
performing and forborne
exposures.
• There is consistency
between the institution’s
credit risk policy and
strategy and its overall
strategy and risk appetite.
• The organisational
framework for credit risk
is robust with clear
responsibilities and a clear
separation of tasks
between risk-takers and
management and control
functions.
• Credit risk measurement,
monitoring and reporting
systems are appropriate.
• Internal limits and the
control framework for
credit risk are sound.
2
There is a medium -
low risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The nature and composition of
credit risk exposure implies low
to medium risk.
• Exposure to complex prod ucts
and transactions is low to
medium.
• The level of credit concentration
risk is low to medium.

[Page 96]
96
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
• The level of forborne and non -
performing exposures is low to
medium.
• The credit risk posed by
performing exposures is low to
medium.
• The level of coverage of
provisions and of credit valuation
adjustments is high.
• The level of coverage and quality
of guarantees and collateral are
high.
• Limits allowing the credit
risk to be mitigated or
limited are in line with the
institution’s credit risk
management strategy and
risk appetite.
3
There is a medium -
high risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The nature and composition of
credit risk exposure implies
medium to high risk.
• Exposure to complex pr oducts
and transactions is medium to
high.
• The level of credit concentration
risk is medium to high.
• The level of forborne and non -
performing exposures is medium
to high.
• The credit risk posed by
performing exposures is medium
to high and subject to further
deterioration under stressed
conditions.
• The level of coverage of
provisions and of credit valuation
adjustments is medium.
• The level of coverage and quality
of guarantees and collateral are
medium.
• Risk management and
controls are not compliant
with respect to the
requirements set out in
the EBA Guidelines on
loan origination and
monitoring and Guidelines
on management of non -
performing and forborne
exposures.
• There is a lack of
consistency between the
institution’s credit risk
policy and strategy and its
overall strategy and risk
appetite.
• The organisational
framework for credit risk
is not sufficiently robust;
there is no clear
separation of tasks
between risk -takers or
management and control
functions.
• Credit risk measurement,
monitoring and reporting
systems are not
appropriate.
• Internal limits and the
control framework for
credit risk are not
sufficiently sound.
• Limits allowing the credit
risk to be mitigated or

[Page 97]
97
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
limited are not in line with
the institution’s credit risk
management strategy and
risk appetite
4
There is a high risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The nature and composition of
credit risk exposure implies high
risk.
• Exposure to complex products
and transactions is high.
• The level of credit concentration
risk is high.
• The level of forborne and non -
performing exposures is high.
• The credit risk posed by
performing exposures is high.
• The level of coverage of
provisions and of credit valuation
adjustments is low.
• The level of coverage and quality
of guarantees and collateral are
low.
6.3 Assessment of market risk
6.3.1 General considerations
238. Competent authorities should assess the market risk concerning those on- and off-balance-
sheet positions which are subject to losses arising from movements in market prices. When
assessing market risk for institutions which do not meet the conditions of the small trading
book as set out in Article 94 of Regulation (EU) 575/2013 competent authorities should consider
the relevance and materiality of at least the following subcategories carrying out a more
detailed assessment of those subcategories which are considered the most relevant for the
institution :
a. interest rate risk in the trading book;
b. credit spread and default risk in the trading book;
c. equity risk in the trading book;
d. foreign-exchange risk;
e. commodities risk;

[Page 98]
98
f. credit valuation adjustment risk;
g. non-delta risk;
h. basis risk;
i. market liquidity risk;
j. model risk for regulatory approved models.
6.3.2 Assessment of inherent market risk
239. Through the assessment of inherent market risk, competent authorities should determine
the main drivers of the institution’s market risk exposure and evaluate the risk of significant
prudential impact on the institution. The assessment of inherent market risk should be
structured around the following main steps:
a. preliminary assessment;
b. assessment of the nature and composition of the institution’s positions subject to
market risk;
c. assessment of profitability;
d. assessment of market concentration risk; and
e. outcome of stress testing.
240. Competent authorities may perform a less granular analysis for institutions which
meet the conditions of the small trading book as set out in Article 94 of Regulation (EU)
575/2013.
Preliminary assessment
241. To determine the scope of the assessment of market risk, competent authorities should
first identify the sources of market risk to which the institution is or may be exposed. To do so,
competent authorities should leverage the knowledge gained from the assessment of other
SREP elements, from the comparison of the in stitution’s position to peers and from any other
supervisory activities.
242. As a minimum, competent authorities should consider:
a. the institution’s market activities, business lines and products;
b. the main strategy of the market risk portfolio and the risk appetite in market
activities;

[Page 99]
99
c. the relative weight of market risk positions in terms of total assets, changes over
time and the institution’s strategy for these positions;
d. the relative weight of net gains on market positions in total operating income; and
e. the own funds requirement for market risk compared to the total own funds
requirement, and – where relevant – the internal capital allocated for market risk
compared to the total internal capital, including the historical change in this figure
and forecasts.
243. In their initial assessments, competent authorities should also consider significant changes
in the institution’s market activities with the focus on potential changes in the total exposure
to market risk. As a minimum, they should assess:
a. significant changes in market risk strategy, policies and sizes of limits;
b. the potential impact on the institution’s risk profile of those changes; and
c. major trends in the financial markets and the institution’s strategy towards it
(including potential risks in case the trends unexpectedly reverse).
Nature and composition of the institution’s market risk activities
244. Competent authorities should analyse the nature of the institution’s market risk exposures
by considering the subcategories defined in paragraph 238 to identify particular risk exposures
and related market risk factors/drivers (e.g. exchange rates, interest rates or credit spreads) for
further in-depth assessment.
245. Competent authorities should analyse market risk exposures by relevant asset classes
and/or financial instruments according to their size, complexity and level of risk. For the most
relevant exposures, competent authorities should assess their related risk factors and drivers.
246. While analysing market risk activities, competent authorities should also consider the
complexity of the financial products (e.g. over-the-counter (OTC) products or products valued
using mark –to-model techniques) and of specific market operations (e.g. high -frequency
trading). The following points should be considered:
a. if the institution holds derivatives positions , competent authorities should assess
both the market value and the notional amount; and
b. when the institution is engaged in OTC derivatives , competent authorities should
evaluate the weight of these transactions in the total derivatives portfolio and the
breakdown of the OTC portfolio by type of contract (swap, forward , etc. ),
underlying financial instruments, etc. (the counterparty credit risk associated with
these products is covered under the credit risk methodology).

[Page 100]
100
247. When appropriate, competent authorities should assess the institution’s evaluation of
distressed and/or illiquid positions (e.g. ‘legacy portfolios’, i.e. portfolios of illiquid assets
related to the discontinued banking practices/activities that are managed on a run -off model)
and the impact of such positions on the institution’s profitability.
248. For those institutions using the internal model approach (IMA) to calculate their regulatory
own funds requirements, competent authorities should also consider the following indicators
to identify particular risk areas and related risk drivers:
a. the split of market risk own funds requirements between the value at risk (VaR),
stressed VaR (SVaR), incremental risk charge (IRC) and charge for correlation
trading portfolio;
b. the VaR broken down by risk factors;
c. the change in the VaR and SVaR (possible indicators could be the day-to-day/week-
to-week change, the quarterly average and back-testing results); and
d. the multiplication factors applied to VaR and SVaR
e. the results of the calculations performed for the purpose of the specific reporting
requirements for market risk, based on using the alternative standardised
approach set out in Chapter 1a of Title IV of Part Three of Regulation (EU) No
575/2013; and
f. where relevant, the results of the calculations performed for the purpose of the
specific reporting requirements for market risk, based on using the alternative
internal model approach (IMA) set out in Chapter 1b of Title IV of Part Three of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
249. When appropriate, competent authorities should also consider the internal risk measures
of institutions. These could include the internal VaR or expected shortfall not used in the
calculations of own funds requirements or sensitivities of the market risk to different risk
factors and potential losses.
250. When analysing inherent market risk, competent authorities should consider ‘point -in-
time’ figures and trends, both on an aggregate basis and by portfolio. Where possible, this
analysis should be completed with a comparison of the institutio n’s figures to peers and to
relevant macroeconomic indicators.
Profitability analysis
251. Competent authorities should analyse the historic profitability, including volatility of
profits, of market activities to gain a better understanding of the institution’s market risk
profile. This analysis could be performed at portfolio level as well as being broken down by

[Page 101]
101
business line, asset class or desk (potentially as part of the wider assessment carried out as part
of the BMA).
252. While assessing profitability, compet ent authorities should pay specific attention to the
main risk areas identified during the examination of market risk activities. Competent
authorities should distinguish between trading revenues and non -trading revenues ( such as
commissions, clients’ fees, etc.) on one hand and realised and unrealised profits/losses on the
other hand.
253. For those asset classes and/or exposures generating abnormal profits or losses, competent
authorities should assess profitability in comparison to the level of risk assumed by the
institution (e.g. VaR/net gains on financial assets and liabilities held for trading) to identify and
analyse possible inconsistencies. Whe re possible, competent authorities should compare the
institution’s figures to its historical performance and its peers.
Market concentration risk
254. Competent authorities should form a view on the degree of market concentration risk to
which the institution is exposed, either from exposures to a single risk factor or from exposures
to multiple risk factors that are correlated.
255. When evaluating possible concentrations, competent authorities should pay special
attention to concentrations in complex products (e.g. structured products), illiquid products
(e.g. collateralised debt obligations ( CDOs)) or products v alued using mark -to-model
techniques.
Stress testing
256. When evaluating the inherent market risk of an institution, competent authorities should
take into account the results of stress tests performed by the institution to identify any
previously unidentified sources of market risk . This is especially important for tail-risk events,
which may be underrepresented or entirely absent from historical data because of their low
frequency of occurrence. Another source of potential hidden vulnerabilities that competent
authorities should consider is the potential for jumps in pricing parameters, such as a sudden
change in certain prices or price bubbles in commodities.
6.3.3 Assessment of market risk management and controls
257. To achieve a comprehensive understanding of the institution’s market risk profile,
competent authorities should review the governance and risk management framework
underlying its market activities. To this end, competent authorities should assess the following
elements:
a. market risk strategy and risk appetite;

[Page 102]
102
b. organisational framework;
c. policies and procedures;
d. risk identification, measurement, monitoring and reporting; and
e. internal control framework.
Market risk strategy and appetite
258. Competent authorities should assess whether institutions have a sound, clearly formulated
and documented market risk strategy , approved by the ir management body. For this
assessment, competent authorities should, in particular, take into account whether:
a. the management body clearly expresses the market risk strategy and appetite and
the process for their review (e.g. in the event of an overall risk strategy review, or
profitability and/or capital adequacy concerns);
b. senior management properly implements the market risk strategy approved by the
management body, ensuring that the institution’s activities are consistent with the
established strategy, written procedures are drawn up and implemented, and
responsibilities are clearly and properly assigned;
c. the institution´s market risk strategy properly reflects the institution’s appetite for
market risk and is consistent with the overall risk appetite;
d. the institution’s market risk strategy and appetite are appropriate for the
institution, given its:
• business model;
• overall risk strategy and appetite;
• market environment and role in the financial system; and
• financial condition, funding capacity and capital adequacy;
e. the institution´s market risk strategy establishes guidance for the management of
the different instruments and/or portfolios that are subject to market risk, and
supports risk-based decision-making;
f. the institution’s market risk strategy broadly cover s all the activities of the
institution where market risk is significant;

[Page 103]
103
g. the institution’s market risk strategy takes into account the cyclical aspects of the
economy and the resulting shifts in the composition of the positions subject to
market risk; and
h. the institution has a n appropriate framework in place to ensure that market risk
strategy is effectively communicated to all relevant staff.
Organisational framework
259. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate
organisational framework for market risk management, measurement, monitoring and control
functions, with sufficient (both qualitative and quantitative) human and technical resources.
They should take into account whether:
a. there are clear lines of responsibility for tak ing, monitoring, controlling and
reporting market risk;
b. there is a clear separation, in the business area, between the front office (position
takers) and the back office (responsible for allocating, recording and settling
transactions);
c. the market risk con trol and monitoring system is clearly identif ied in the
organisation, and functionally and hierarchically independent of the business area,
and whether it is subject to independent review;
d. the risk management, measurement, monitoring and control functions cover
market risk in the entire institution (including subsidiaries and branches), and in
particular all areas where market risk can be taken, mitigated or monitored; and
e. the staff involved in market activities (both in business areas and in management
and control areas) have appropriate skills and experience.
Policies and procedures
260. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has clearly defined policies
and procedures for the identification, management, measurement and control of market risk.
They should take into account:
a. whether the management body approves the policies for managing, measuring and
controlling market risk and discusses and reviews them regularly, in line with risk
strategies;
b. whether senior management is responsible for developing them, ensuring
adequate implementation of the management body’s decisions;

[Page 104]
104
c. whether market policies are compliant with relevant regulations and adequate for
the nature and complexity of the institution’s activities, enabling a clear
understanding of the market risk inherent to the different products and activities
under the scope of the institution, and whether such policies are clearly formalised,
communicated and applied consistently across the institution; and
d. for groups, whether these policies are applied consistently across the group and
allow proper management of the risk.
261. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution’s market policies and
procedures are sound and consistent with the market risk strategy and cover all the main
businesses and processes relevant for managing, measuring and controlling mar ket risk. In
particular, the assessment should cover:
a. the nature of operations, financial instruments and markets in which the institution
can operate;
b. the positions to include in, and to exclude from, the trading book for regulatory
purposes;
c. policies regarding internal hedges;
d. the definition, structure and responsibilities of the institution’s trading desks,
where appropriate;
e. requirements relating to trading and settlement processes;
f. procedures for limiting and controlling market risk;
g. the framework for ensuring that all positions measured at fair value are subject to
additional valuation adjustments in accordance with Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2016/101 (RTS on prudent valuation);
h. the criteria applied by the institution to avoid a ssociation with individuals/groups
involved in fraudulent activities and other crimes; and
i. procedures for new market activities and/or products; competent authorities
should ensure that:
• new market activities and/or products are subject to adequate procedures
and controls before being introduced or undertaken;
• the institution has undertaken an analysis of their possible impact on its
overall risk profile.
Risk identification, measurement, monitoring and reporting

[Page 105]
105
262. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate
framework for identifying , understanding and measuring market risk, in line with the
institution’s size and complexity, and that this framework is compliant with relevant minimum
requirements in accordance with the relevant EU and national implementing legislation. They
should consider whether:
a. the data, information systems and measurement techniques enable management
to measure the market risk inherent in all material on - and off -balance sheet
activities (where relevant at group level) , including both trading and banking
portfolios, as well as complying with supervisory reporting requirements;
b. institutions have adequate staff and methodologies to measure the market risk in
their trading and banking portfolios, taking into account the institution’s size and
complexity and the risk profile of its activities;
c. the institution ’s risk measurement system takes into account all material risk
factors related to its market risk exposures ( including basis risk, credit spreads in
corporate bonds or credit derivatives, and vega and gamma risks in options).
Where some instruments and/or factors are excluded from the risk measurement
systems, competent authorities should assess the materiality of the exclusions and
determine whether such exclusions are justified;
d. the institution’s risk measurement systems are able to identify possible market risk
concentrations aris ing either from exposures to a single risk factor or from
exposures to multiple risk factors that are correlated;
e. risk managers and the institution’s senior management understand the
assumptions underlying the measurement systems , in particular for more
sophisticated risk management techniques; and
f. risk managers and the institution’s senior management are aware of the degree of
model risk that prevails in the institution’s pricing models and risk measurement
techniques and whether they periodically check the validity and quality of the
different models used in market risk activities.
263. Competent authorities should assess whether an institution has implemented adequate
stress tests that complement its risk measurement system. For this purposes, they should take
into account the following elements:
a. stress test frequency;
b. whether relevant risk drivers are identified (e.g. illiquidity/gapping of prices,
concentrated positions, one-way markets, etc.);
c. assumptions underlying the stress scenario; and

[Page 106]
106
d. internal use of stress testing outcomes for capital planning and market risk
strategies.
264. For the purposes of Article 101 of Directive 2013/36/EU, if the institution is authorised to
use internal models to determine minimum own funds requirements for market risk,
competent authorities should verify that the institution continue s to fulfil the minimum
requirements specified in the relevant EU and national implementing legislation and that such
internal models do not involve any underestimation of material risk.
265. Competent authorities should assess whether institutions have in place an adequate
monitoring and reporting framework for market risk that ensure s there will be prompt action
at the appropriate level of the institution’s senior management or management body where
necessary. The monitoring system should include specific indicators and relevant trigg ers to
provide effective early warning alerts. Competent authorities should take into account
whether:
a. the institution has effective information systems for accurate and timely
identification, aggregation, monitoring and reporting of market risk activities; and
b. the management and control area reports regularly to the management body and
senior management with, as a minimum, information on current market
exposures, P&L results and risk measures (e.g. VaR) compared to policy limits.
Internal control framework
266. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has a strong and
comprehensive control framework and sound safeguards to mitigate its market risk in line with
its market risk management strategy and risk appetite. They should take into account whether:
a. the scope covered by the institution ’s control function includes all consolidated
entities, all geographical locations and all financial activities;
b. there are internal controls, operating limits and other practices aimed at ensuring
market risk exposures do not exceed levels acceptable to the institution, in
accordance with the parameters set by the management body and senior
management and the institution’s risk appetite; and
c. the institution has appropriate internal control s and practice s to ensure that
breaches of and exceptions to policies, procedures and limits are reported in a
timely manner to the appropriate level of management for action. They should take
into account whether the institution’s internal controls and practices:
• are able to identify breaches of individual limits set at desk or business-unit
level, as well as breaches of the overall limit for the market activities; and

[Page 107]
107
• allow daily identification and monitoring of breaches of limits and/or
exceptions.
267. Competent authorities should assess the limit system, including whether:
a. the limits established are absolute or whether breaches of limits are possible. In
the latter case, the institution’s policies should clearly describe the period of time
during which and the specific ci rcumstances under which such breaches of limits
are possible;
b. the limit system sets an overall limit for market activities and specific limits for the
main risk subcategories; where appropriate, it should allow allocation of limits by
portfolio, desk, business unit or type of instrument; the level of detail should reflect
the characteristics of the institution’s market activities;
c. the set of limits (limits based on risk metric, notional limits, loss control limits, etc.)
established by the institution suits the size and complexity of its market activities;
d. the institution has procedures to keep traders up to date about their limits; and
e. the institution has adequate procedures to update its limits regularly.
268. Competent authorities should assess the functionality of the internal audit function. They
should assess whether:
a. the institution conducts internal audits of the market risk management framework
on a regular basis;
b. the internal audit function covers the main elements of market risk management,
measurement and control across the institution; and
c. the internal audit function is effective in determining adherence to internal policies
and any relevant external regulations, and addressing any deviations from either.
269. For institutions using internal models to determine own funds requirements for market
risk, competent authorities should assess whether the internal validation process is sound and
effective in challenging model assumptions and identifying any potential shortcomings with
respect to market risk modelling, market risk quantification, the market risk management
system and other relevant minimum requirements as specified in the relevant EU and national
implementing legislation.
6.3.4 Summary of findings and scoring
270. Following the above assessment, competent authorities sh ould form a view on the
institution’s market risk. This view should be reflected in a summary of findings, accompanied
by a risk score based on the considerations specified in Table 5. Where, based on the materiality

[Page 108]
108
of certain risk subcategories, the competent authority decides to assess and score them
individually, the guidance provided in this table should be applied, as far as possible, by analogy.
271. Since factors such as complexity, level of concentration and the volatility of mark et
exposures’ returns may not be perfect indicators of the market risk level, in assessing and
scoring inherent market risk, competent authorities should consider all these factors in parallel
and not in isolation and understand the drivers behind volatility trends.
Table 5. Supervisory considerations for assigning a market risk score
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
1
There is a low level of
risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The nature and composition of
market risk exposures imply not
material/very low risk.
• The institution’s exposures to
market risk are non-complex.
• The level of market risk
concentration is no t
material/very low.
• The i nstitution’s market risk
exposures generate non -volatile
returns.
• There is c onsistency
between the institution’s
market risk policy and
strategy and its overall
strategy and risk appetite.
• The organisational
framework for market risk
is robust , with clear
responsibilities and a clear
separation of tasks
between risk-takers and
management and control
functions.
• Market risk measurement,
monitoring and reporting
systems are appropriate.
• Internal limits and the
control framework for
market risk are sound and
in line with the
institution’s risk
management strategy and
risk appetite.
2
There is a medium-
low risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The nature and composition of
market risk exposures imply low
to medium risk.
• The complexity of the
institution’s market risk
exposures is low to medium.
• The level of market risk
concentration is low to medium.
• The institution’s market risk
exposures generate returns
that have a low to medium
degree of volatility.
3
There is a medium -
high risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The nature and composition of
market risk exposures imply
medium to high risk.
• The complexity of the
institution’s market ris k
exposures is medium to high.
• The level of market risk
concentration is medium to high.
• The i nstitution’s exposures to
market risk generate returns that
• There is not full
consistency between the
institution’s ma rket risk
policy and strategy and its
overall strategy and risk
profile.
• The organisational
framework for market risk
does not sufficiently
separate responsibilities

[Page 109]
109
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
have a medium to high degree of
volatility.
and tasks between risk-
takers and management
and control functions.
• Market risk measurement,
monitoring and reporting
systems are not
undertaken with sufficient
accuracy and frequency.
• Internal limits and the
control framework for
market risk are not in line
with the institution’s risk
management strategy or
risk appetite.
4
There is a high risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The nature and composition of
market risk exposures imply high
risk.
• The complexity of the
institution’s marke t risk
exposures is high.
• The level of market risk
concentration is high.
• The i nstitution’s exposures to
market risk generate returns that
have a high degree of volatility.
6.4 Assessment of operational risk
6.4.1 General considerations
272. Competent authorities should assess operational risk throughout all the business lines and
operations of the institution, taking into account findings from the assessment of internal
governance arrangements and institution -wide controls as specified in Tit le 5. In conducting
this assessment, they should determine how operational risk may materialise (economic loss,
near miss, loss of future earnings, gain) and should also consider potential impacts in terms of
other related risks (e.g. credit-operational risk, market-operational risk ‘boundary cases’).
273. Competent authorities should assess the materiality of operational risk arising from
outsourced services and activities, and whether these could affect the institution’s ability to
process transactions and/or provide services, or cause legal liabilities for damage to third
parties (e.g. customers and other stakeholders).
274. When assessing operational risk, competent authorities should assess ICT risk, as ICT
performance and security are considered paramount for an institution to conduct its business.
Thus, competent authorities should assess potential impact of ICT risks on the critical activities
of an institution and consider the potential financial, reputational, regulatory and strategic
impact on the institution as well as the potential for business disruption.
275. Competent authorities should assess reputational risk jointly with operational risk because
of the strong links between the two (e.g. most operational risk events have a strong impact in
terms of reputat ion). However, the outcome of reputational risk assessment should not be
reflected in the scoring of operational risk but, where relevant, should be considered as part of
the BMA and/or the liquidity risk assessment, since the main effects it can have are reductions

[Page 110]
110
in earnings and loss of confidence in or disaffection with the institution by investors, depositors
or interbank-market participants.
276. In assessing operational risk, competent authorities should use, to the extent possible, the
event-type classification for the advanced measurement approaches provided in Article 324 of
Regulation (EU ) No 575/2013 and specified in Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)
2018/95934to gain a clearer view of the spectrum of operational risks and to achieve a level of
consistency in analysing these risks across institutions, irrespective of the approach adopted to
determine own funds requirements for operational risk. When assessing operational ris k,
competent authorities should also consider conduct risk, model risk and ICT risk.
6.4.2 Assessment of inherent operational risk
277. Competent authorities should conduct an assessment of the nature and the extent of the
operational risk to which the institution is or might be exposed. To this end, competent
authorities should develop a thorough understanding of the institution’s business model, its
operations, its risk culture and the env ironment in which it operates, since all these factors
determine the institution’s operational risk exposure.
278. The assessment of inherent operational risk comprises two steps, which are described in
more detail in this section:
a. preliminary assessment; and
b. assessment of the nature and significance of the operational risk exposures and
operational risk subcategories faced by the institution.
Preliminary assessment
279. To determine the scope of the assessment of operational risk, competent authorit ies
should first identify the sources of operational risk to which the institution is exposed. To do
so, competent authorities should also leverage the knowledge gained from the assessment of
other SREP elements, from the comparison of the institution’s po sition to peers (including
relevant external data, where available), from any other supervisory activities including the
input from the AML/CFT supervisors and from other relevant information sources.
280. As a minimum, competent authorities should consider:
a. the main strategy for operational risk and operational risk appetite;
34 Commission Delegated Regulation(EU) 2018/959 of 14 March 2018 supplementing Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of the
European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards of the specification of the
assessment methodology under which competent authorities permit institutions to use Advanced Measurement
Approaches for operational risk (OJ L 169, 6.7.2018, p. 1).

[Page 111]
111
b. the business and external environments (including geographical location of the
parent company and its entities as well as of ICT operations and data centres) in
which the institution operates and distribution channels used;
c. the own funds requirement for operational risk (distinguished by the basic
indicator approach (BIA), the standardised approach (TSA) and the advanced
measurement approaches (AMA)) compared to the total own funds requirement,
and – where relevant – the internal capital for operational risk compared to the
total internal capital, taking into account the historical trends and forecasts, if
available;
d. the level of and change in gross income, assets and operational risk losses over the
past few years at the aggregated level but also for material entities and business
lines;
e. recent significant corporate events (such as mergers, acquisitions, disposals and
restructuring), which might determine a change in the institution’s operational risk
profile in the short or medium to long term (e.g. because systems, processes and
procedures would not be fully aligned with the risk management policies of the
parent undertaking in the short term);
f. changes to significant elements of the IT sys tems and/or of processes that might
determine a change in the operational risk profile (e.g. because a new or changed
IT system has not been properly tested, or because insufficient training on the new
systems/processes and procedures might lead to errors);
g. failures to comply with applicable legislation or with internal regulations as
reported by other supervisors (including AML/CFT supervisors) , external auditors
and the internal audit function or brought to light by public information (bearing in
mind both the current situation and changes in regulatory compliance behaviour
over time);
h. the ambitiousness of business plans and aggressive incentives and compensation
schemes (e.g. in terms of sales targets, including accepting customers identified as
high ML/TF risk by the institution or expansion to high ML/TF risk jurisdictions or
distribution of new products/services bearing a high level of inherent ML/TF risk,
headcount reduction, etc.), which might increase the risk of non -compliance,
human error and employee malpractice;
i. the processes, procedures, products (sold to customers or dealt in)and IT systems
(including the use of new technologies), to the extent that they might lead to
incidents, errors, delays, misspecification, security breaches, increased exposure to
fraud, ML/TF and other types of financial crime, etc.; and

[Page 112]
112
j. the potential impact of outsourcing arrangements, and in general all arrangements
with third parties, on institutions’ operational risk as well as the institutions’
oversight on the perfor mance of the service providers in delivering all the
outsourced services, including the level of awareness of operational risk related to
outsourced activities and of service providers’ overall risk exposure in line with the
EBA Guidelines on outsourcing arrangements.
281. Where relevant, the competent authority should analyse the aspects above by business
line/legal entity and geography as well as by event type category, provided that data are
available, and compare the institution’s position to its peers.
Nature of operational risk exposures
282. Competent authorities should determine the nature of operational risk exposures by
analysing exposures to the main drivers of operational risk to form a forward -looking view on
potential risk and losses. Such an analysis may require consideration of business lines, products,
processes and geographies relevant to the institution, as well as an assessment of operational
risk exposures to primary risk drivers (e.g. processes, people, systems and external factors),
with use of the institution’s self-risk assessment and peer analysis.
283. In performing this analysis, competent authorities should consider the interactions of such
risk drivers in determining the institution’s operational risk exposur es (e.g. exposure to more
risk drivers might increase the likelihood of an operational event and consequent loss, including
the possibility to impose sanctions).
Significance of operational risk exposure
284. Once the major sources and drivers of operational risk have been identified, the competent
authority should focus on those that might have the most material impact on the institution.
The competent authority should assess the institution’s ‘potential exposure’ to the operational
risk by using both expert judgement and qualitative and quantitative indicators relating to
either the institution or its peers, and also include information from other supervisors (e.g.
AML/CFT supervisors).
285. In assessing the significance of operational risk exposures, competent auth orities should
consider both the frequency and the severity of the events to which the institution is exposed,
and distinguish those causing high -severity losses and those occurring with high frequencies .
Based on this distinction , competent authorities sh ould assess the trends of operational risk
losses and their concentration.
286. A primary source of information competent authorities should consider is the institution’s
operational losses and event database, which, where available and reliable (i.e. accurate and
complete), provides the historical operational risk profile of the institution.

[Page 113]
113
287. For institutions adopting internal models for operational risk, the competent authority
should also consider the output of the internal approach, provided that this approach is capable
of measuring the operational risk exposure in the desired level of detail (e.g. product, process,
etc.) and assuming that the model is sufficiently forward -looking. However, competent
authorities should also take into account the limitations and potential weaknesses of the
internal models.
288. In addition, competent authorities should perform a more qualitative analysis and leverage
the institution’s risk assessment, peer analysis data and public and/or consortium databases, if
available and relevant. Competent authorities may also consider other factors, specific to the
relevant business units, etc. affected by the potential deficiencies, which can provide a measure
of the risk exposure.
289. In performing the assessment of an institution’s risk e xposure, competent authorities
should employ a forward -looking approach, leveraging scenario analyses performed by the
institution, where available, and taking into consideration any corrective measures and
mitigation actions already implemented and effective.
Assessment of operational risk subcategories
290. Competent authorities should identify and assess operational risk across all operational risk
subcategories (including those defined by event types and further breakdowns of these event
types) and the associated risk drivers. Competent authorities should focus the assessment on
those subcategories, which are considered the most significant for the institution. The
significance of a subcategory should be evaluated by leveraging the quantitative information
collected during the preliminary assessment, including the level of losses per subcategory with
regard to capital requirement and gross income. Competent authorities should also apply their
expert judg ement to identi fy significant subcategories, based on all available internal and
external information sources.
291. In conducting the assessment, competent authorities should pay particular attention to
some specific aspects of operational risk because of their pervasive nature and their relevance
to the majority of institutions, and also because of their potential prudential impact. Such
aspects which should always be in the focus of assessment include:
a. ICT risk;
b. conduct risk; and
c. model risk.
ICT risk

[Page 114]
114
292. Competent authorities should assess the ICT risk in accordance with the EBA Guidelines on
ICT Risk Assessment under the SREP 35 and having regard to the EBA Guidelines on ICT and
security risk management, taking into account that ICT risk is a key driver of operational risk.
Conduct risk
293. Competent authorities should assess the relevance and significance of the institution’s
exposures to conduct risk, considering the factors listed in points a to g which are relevant to
the institution . For Category-1 and Category-2 institutions, competent authorities should
consider all of the following:
a. mis-selling of products, in both retail and wholesale markets, including pushed
cross-selling of products to retail customers, such as packaged bank accounts or
add-on products customers do not need;
b. conflicts of interest in conducting business;
c. manipulation o f benchmark interest rates, foreign exchange rates or any other
financial instruments or indices to enhance the institution’s profits;
d. barriers to switching financial products during their lifetime and/or to switching
financial service providers;
e. poorly designed distribution channels that may enable conflicts of interest with
false incentives;
f. automatic renewals of products or exit penalties; and/or
g. unfair processing of customer complaints.
294. Since conduct risk covers a wide range of issues and may arise from many business
processes and products, competent authorities should leverage the outcome of the BMA and
scrutinise incentive policies to gain a high-level insight into sources of conduct risk.
295. Where relevant, the competent authority should consider the lev el of competition in the
markets in which the institution operates and determine whether any dominant position, either
alone or within a small group, presents a material risk of misconduct (e.g. as a result of cartel-
like behaviour).
296. Possible indicators to flag the existence of conduct risk are:
a. sanctions applied by relevant authorities to the institution for misconduct
practices;
35 EBA Guidelines on ICT Risk Assessment under the Supervisory Review and Evaluation process (SREP) (EBA/GL/2017/05)

[Page 115]
115
b. sanctions applied to peers for misconduct practices; and
c. complaints against the institution in terms of numbers and amounts at stake.
297. However, t he competent authority should apply a forward -looking approach, also
considering the possible impact of regulatory developments and the activity of relevant
authorities in respect of consumer protection and the supply of financial services in general.
Model risk
298. Under the operational risk competent authorities should assess two distinct forms of model
risk:
a. risk relating to the underestimation of own funds requirements by regulatory
advanced measurement approaches; and
b. risk of losses relating to the development, implementation or improper use of any
other models by the institution for decision -making (e.g. product pricing,
evaluation of financial instruments, monitoring of risk limits, etc .), where
competent authorities should establish an overview of such models and evaluate
their significance and assess the model risk management framework adopted by
the institution.
299. For the purpose of point (a) of paragraph 298, competent authorities should assess the
institution’s exposure to model risk arising from the use of internal models in the main business
areas and operations , following the definition and requirements specified in Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2018/959 as far as they are applicable . The assessment of model
risk may be based on the insights gained in other supervisory actions, including those carried
out in accordance with Article 101 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
300. For the purpose of point (b) of paragraph 298 competent authorities should consider:
a. to what extent and for wh ich purposes the institution use s models to make
decisions and the business significance of such decisions . Competent authorities
should determine the business/activity for which the institution makes material
use of models. In conducting this assessment, competent authorities may look at
the following areas, where institutions commonly make extensive use of models:
i. trading in f inancial instruments (including assets evaluation and trading
strategies);
ii. risk measurement and management; and
iii. capital allocation (including lending policies and product pricing).

[Page 116]
116
b. the institution’s level of awareness of and how it manages model risk by assessing
whether:
i. the institution has implemented control mechanisms (e.g. market -
parameter calibration, internal validat ion or back -testing, counter -
checking with expert judgement, etc.)that are sound in terms of methods,
frequency, follow-up, etc., and that include a model approval process; and
ii. the institution uses models in a conservative manner (e.g. by increasing or
decreasing relevant parameters based on the direction of the positions,
etc.) if it is aware of model deficiencies or market and business
developments.
301. When conducting the model risk assessment, competent authorities should consider the
assessment of other risks to capital and risks to liquidity and funding, in particular with respect
to the adequacy of methodologies used for measuring risk, pricing and evaluating assets and/or
liabilities. The results of such an assessment should inform the findings on operational risk.
302. For those business areas that make significant use of models, the competent authority
should then assess how significant the impact of model risk might be, amongst others, through
sensitivity and scenario analyses or stress testing.
6.4.3 Assessment of reputational risk
303. Competent authorities should assess the reputational risk to which the institution is
exposed, by leveraging their understanding of the institution’s governance, its business model,
its products, its customer base and the environment in which it operates. Such an assessment
should also focus on the overall reputational risk framework, ensuring the ability of the
institution to manage and mitigate any reputation events through appropriate communication
strategies.
304. Reputational risk is more relevant for large institutions, in particular those with listed
equities or debts or those that operate in interbank markets. Accordingly, when assessing
reputational risk, competent authorities should pay more attention to institutions that present
those characteristics.
305. Competent authorities should consider both internal and external factors or events that
might give rise to reputational concerns in respect of the institution considering those of the
factors listed in points a to i which are relevant to the institution. For Category-1 and Categpry-
2 institutions, competent authorities should consider all of the following indicators in their
assessment of the institution’s exposure to reputational risk:
a. the number of sanctions from official b odies (not only those from competent
authorities, but also sanctions arising from tax or other settlements);

[Page 117]
117
b. ongoing known investigations by official bodies in respect of the institution or its
representatives, and sanctions imposed or ongoing known investigations or legal
disputes related to tax matters or other settlements, or due to materialisation of
ML/TF risk or breaches of AML/CFT legislation;
c. media campaigns and consumer -association initiatives that contribute to a
deterioration in the public perception and reputation of the institution;
d. the number of and changes in customer complaints or sudden loss of customers or
investors;
e. negative events affecting the institution’s peers when they are associated by the
public with the whole financial sector or a group of institutions;
f. the reputation of individuals involved in the management of the institution
assessed in line with the Joint ESMA and EBA Guidelines on the assessment of the
suitability of members of the management body and key function holders and the
reputation of individuals with qualifying shareholding in the institution assessed in
line with the ESAs Joint Guidelines on the prudential assessment of acquisitions
and increases of qualifying holdings in the financial sector36;
g. its dealing with sectors or jurisdictions that are highly exposed to money laundering
and terrorist financing 37 or individuals associated with high risk from a n ML/TF
perspective;
h. the reputational impact of affected ICT systems and services and of cybersecurity
incidents; and
i. other ‘market’ indicators, if available (e.g. rating downgrades or changes in the
share price throughout the year).
306. Competent authorities should assess the significance of the institution’s reputational risk
exposure and how it is connected wit h the other risks (i.e. credit, market, operational and
liquidity risks) by leveraging the other risk assessments (including from other supervisory
authorities) to identify any possible secondary effects in either direction (from reputation to
other risks and vice versa).
307. In the context of the operational risk analysis, competent authorities should take into
account the relevance and significance of the institution’s exposures to ML/TF risk from a
prudential perspective under the scope of operational risk. In this respect, competent
authorities should use the relevant input received from AML/CFT supervisors to supplement
36 ESAs Joint Guidelines on the prudential assessment of acquisitions and increases of qualifying holdings in the financial
sector (JC/GL/2016/01).
37 Refer to EBA Guidelines on ML/TF risk factors (EBA/GL/2021/02).

[Page 118]
118
their findings from ongoing supervision and evaluate whether they give rise to prudential
concerns related to ML/TF risk.
308. Competent authorities should bear in mind that any institution can be exposed to ML/TF
risk regardless of the institution’s size or financial soundness. Therefore, sufficient attention
should also be paid to institutions that are perceived to be financially sound and may h ave a
good reputation given that these institutions might be specifically targeted for ML/TF purposes.
Attention should also be paid to institutions that are very successful in attracting new
customers / expanding market share – especially by using non-traditional distribution channels
- since this could be related to weak customer due diligence controls at the on boarding phase.
309. Competent authorities should share relevant information on operational risk issues
identified that can give rise to ML/TF risks and concerns such as deficiencies in the institutions’
IT system or internal control framework with AML/CFT supervisors.
6.4.4 Assessment of operational risk management, measurement and controls
310. Competent authorities should assess the framework and arrangements that the institution
has specifically to manage and control operational risk as an individual risk category. This
assessment should take into account the outcome of the analysis of the overall risk
management and internal-control framework addressed in Title 5, as this will influence the
institution’s operational risk exposures. Regarding ML/TF risk, the competent authority should
take into account the assessment provided by the AML/CFT supervisor.
311. Competent authorities should approach this review having regard to the key operational
risk drivers (i.e. people, processes, external factors, systems), which can also act as mitigating
factors, and should consider:
a. the operational risk management strategy and appetite;
b. the organisational framework;
c. policies and procedures;
d. operational risk identification, measurement, monitoring and reporting;
e. business resilience and continuity plans; and
f. the internal control framework as it applies to the management of operational risk.
Operational risk management strategy and appetite
312. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has defined and formalised a
sound operational risk management strategy and appetite level, approved by the management
body. For this assessment, competent authorities should take into account whether:

[Page 119]
119
a. the management body clearly expresses the operational risk management strategy
and appetite level, as well as the process for the review thereof (e.g. in the event
of an overall risk strategy review, a loss t rend and/or capital adequacy concerns,
etc.);
b. senior management properly implements and monitors the operational risk
management strategy approved by the management body, ensuring that the
institution´s operational risk mitigation measures are consistent w ith the strategy
established;
c. these strategies are appropriate and efficient with respect to the nature and
materiality of the operational risk profile and whether the institution monitors
their effectiveness over time and their consistency with the operat ional risk
appetite level;
d. the institution’s operational risk management strategy covers all the activities,
processes and systems of the institution – including on a forward-looking basis
through the strategic plan – where operational risk is or may be significant; and
e. the institution has an appropriate framework in place to ensure that the
operational risk management strategy is effectively communicated to relevant
staff.
313. To assess the credibility of such strategies, competent authorities should also assess
whether the institution has allocated sufficient resources to their implementation, and whether
relevant decisions taken are irrespective of minimum own funds requirements benefits that
might accrue (in particular for institutions adopting the BIA or TSA approaches t o determine
minimum own funds requirements).
Organisational framework for management and oversight of operational risk
314. Competent authorities should assess the soundness and effectiveness of the organisational
framework with respect to the management of operational risk. In this regard, the competent
authority should determine whether:
a. there are clear lines of responsibility for the identification, analysis, assessment,
mitigation, monitoring and reporting of operational risk;
b. the operational risk control an d monitoring systems are subject to independent
review and there is a clear separation between risk-takers and risk managers,
between these and the risk control and oversight risk functions;
c. the risk management, measurement, and control functions cover ope rational risk
across the entire institution (including branches) in an integrated manner,

[Page 120]
120
irrespective of the measurement approach adopted to determine minimum own
funds, and also cover outsourced business functions and other activities; and
d. the operationa l risk management framework is structured with sufficient and
qualitatively appropriate human and technical resources.
Policies and procedures
315. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has appropriate policies and
procedures for the manag ement of operational risk, including residual risk after mitigation
techniques have been applied. For this assessment, competent authorities should take into
account whether:
a. the management body approves the policies for managing operational risk and
reviews them regularly, in line with the operational risk management strategies;
b. senior management is responsible for developing and implementing the policies
and procedures for managing operational risk;
c. operational risk management policies and procedures are clearly formalised and
communicated throughout the institution and are applied consistently across the
institution, or at least those processes and businesses most exposed to operational
risk;
d. policies and procedures cover all the elements of operational risk management,
measurement and control including, where relevant, loss data collection,
quantification methodologies, mitigation techniques (e.g. insurance policies),
causal analysis techniques in respect of operational risk events, limits and the
handling of exceptions to those limits;
e. the institution has implemented an approval process for new products, processes
and systems that requires assessment and mitigation of potential operational risks
raised by the implementation and the development of the rel ated new products,
processes and systems;
f. such policies are adequate for the nature and complexity of the institution’s
activities, and enable a clear understanding of the operational risk inherent to the
different products and activities under the scope of the institution;
g. the institution promotes an operational risk management culture throughout the
organisation, by means of training and by setting targets for operational loss
reduction.
Risk identification, measurement, monitoring and reporting

[Page 121]
121
316. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate
framework for identifying, assessing, measuring and monitoring operational risk, in line with
the institution’s size and complexity, and whether the framework is compliant, as a minimum,
with the relevant minimum own funds requirements under the relevant EU and national
implementing legislation. Competent authorities should take into account whether:
a. the institution has implemented effective processes and procedures for
comprehensive iden tification and assessment of operational risk exposure (e.g.
Risk and Control Self -Assessments (RCSA)) and for the detection and accurate
categorisation of relevant events (i.e. loss data collection, ‘near misses’ with no loss
impact or even events that generate unexpected gains), including boundary cases
with other risks (e.g. credit loss caused or augmented by an operational risk event);
in this regard, competent authorities should also determine the ability of the
institution to identify the key drivers of relevant operational losses and use this
information for operational risk management purposes;
b. for the purposes of Article 101 of Directive 2013/36/EU, if the institution is
authorised to use an internal model to determine minimum own funds
requirements for operational risk, the institution continues to fulfil the minimum
requirements specified in the relevant EU and national implementing legislation
and whether such an internal model involves any material risk underestimation;
c. the institution has appropriate information systems and methodologies to quantify
or assess the operational risk, which comply, as a minimum, with requirements for
determining relevant minimum own funds as specified in the relevant EU and
national implementing legislation (e.g. for TSA, mapping of relevant profit and loss
items to the eight regulatory business lines; for the AMA, the length of time series,
treatment of insurance, correlation, etc.);
d. the institution has implemented adequate stress testing and scenario analysis, as
appropriate, to understand the impact of adverse operational events on its
profitability and own funds, also taking into due consideration the potential failure
of internal controls and mitigation techniques; where relevant, competent
authorities should cons ider the consistency of these analyses with the RCSA and
with the outcome of peer analysis;
e. the institution’s management body and senior management understand the
assumptions underlying the measurement system and whether they are aware of
the degree of relevant model risk;
f. the institution has defined and implemented continuous and effective monitoring
of operational risk exposures throughout the institution, including outsourced
activities and new products and systems, amongst others, by means of specific

[Page 122]
122
forward-looking indicators (key risk indicators and key control indicators) and
relevant triggers to provide effective early warning alerts;
g. the institution has defined adequate actions to respond to residual risks to keep
them within the limits defined in the risk appetite;
h. the institution has implemented regular reporting on operational risk exposure,
including stress testing outcomes, to the management body, senior management
and the managers of relevant businesses and processes as appropriate.
317. Competent authorities should assess the institution’s ICT risk management framework in
accordance with the EBA Guidelines on ICT Risk Assessment under the SREP and having regard
to the EBA Guidelines on ICT and security risk management.
Business resilience and continuity plans
318. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has in place comprehensive
and tested business resilience and continuity plans, covering at least critical and important
functions, including those that are outsourced, to ensure that it is able to operate on an ongoing
basis and limit losses in the event of severe business disruption. For outsourced activities,
competent authorities should ensure that the service provider has a suita ble business
continuity plan in line with the EBA Guidelines on outsourcing arrangements.
319. Competent authorities should determine whether the institution has established business
continuity plans commensurate with the nature, size and complexity of its oper ations. Such
plans should take into account different types of likely or plausible scenarios to which the
institution may be vulnerable.
320. Competent authorities should assess the quality and effectiveness of the institution’s
continuity management planning process. In doing so, competent authorities should evaluate
the quality of the institution’s adherence to recognised Business Continuity Management
(BCM) processes. Accordingly, competent authorities should determine whether the
institution’s continuity management planning process includes:
a. a Business Impact Analysis;
b. appropriate recovery strategies incorporating internal and external dependencies
and clearly defined recovery priorities;
c. the drafting of comprehensive and flexible plans to deal with plausible scenarios;
d. effective testing of the design and operational effectiveness of the plans;
e. BCM awareness and training programmes; and
f. communications and crisis-management documentation and training.

[Page 123]
123
Internal control framework
321. Competent authorities should ass ess whether the institution has a strong control
framework and sound safeguards to mitigate its operational risk, in line with its operational risk
management appetite and strategy. Competent authorities should take into account whether:
a. the scope covered by the institution’s control functions includes all consolidated
entities and geographical locations;
b. there are internal controls and other practices (e.g. risk responses, such as conduct
policies, risk transfer techniques , etc.) aimed at mitigating operat ional risk
exposures or curtailing potential impacts, and keeping them within levels
acceptable to the institution, in accordance with the parameters set by the
management body and senior management and the institution’s risk appetite level;
and
c. the instit ution has appropriate internal controls and practices to ensure that
breaches of and exceptions to policies, procedures and limits are reported in a
timely manner to the appropriate level of management for action, and to
competent authorities as required.
322. Competent authorities should also assess the functionality of the internal audit function.
To this end, they should determine whether:
a. the institution conducts internal audits of the operational risk management
framework on a regular basis;
b. the internal au dit covers the main elements of operational risk management
measurement and control across the institution; and
c. such audits are effective in determining adherence to internal policies and any
relevant external regulations and addressing any deviations from them.
323. For institutions using the AMA to determine minimum own funds requirements for
operational risk, competent authorities should also assess whether the internal approach-
validation process is sound and effective in challenging model assumptions and identifying any
potential shortcomings with respect to operational risk modelling, quantification and systems
and other relevant minimum requirements specified in the relevant EU and national
implementing legislation.
324. Irrespective of the approach adopted by the institution to determine regulatory minimum
own funds, when models are used for decision -making (e.g. credit lending, pricing, trading
financial instruments, etc.), competent authorities should assess whether there is a sound
internal validation process and/or model-review process to identify and mitigate model risk.

[Page 124]
124
Management of reputational risk
325. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has implemented adequate
arrangements, strategies, processes and mechanisms to manage reputational risk. In particular,
competent authorities should take into account whether:
a. the institution has formalised policies and processes in place for the identification,
management and monitoring of this risk, and whether these policies and processes
are proportionate to its size and its relevance in the system;
b. the institution addresses this risk in a precautionary manner, for example by setting
limits or requiring approval for allocating capital to specific co untries, sectors or
persons and/or whether its contingency plans address the need to deal proactively
with reputational issues in the event of a crisis;
c. the institution conducts stress testing or scenario analysis to assess any secondary
effects of reputat ional risk (e.g. liquidity, funding costs , access to correspondent
banking service, etc.);
d. the institution acts to protect its brand through prompt communication campaigns
where specific events occur that might endanger its reputation; and
e. the institution considers the potential impact of its strategy and business plans, and
more generally of its behaviour, on its reputation.
6.4.5 Summary of findings and scoring
326. Following the above assessment, competent authorities should form a view on the
institution’s operational risk. This view should be reflected in a summary of findings,
accompanied by a risk score based on the considerations specified in Table 6. If, based on the
materiality of certain risk subcategories, the competent authority decides to assess and score
them individually, the guidance provided in this table should be applied , as far as possible, by
analogy.
Table 6. Supervisory considerations for assigning an operational risk score
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
1
There is a low risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The institution’s operational risk
exposures are limited to a few
high-frequency/low-severity
impact categories.
• The significance of the
institution’s exposure to
operational risk is no t
material/very low , as shown by
• There is c onsistency
between the institution’s
operational risk policy and
strategy and its overall
strategy and risk appetite.
• The organisational
framework for operational
risk is robust with c lear

[Page 125]
125
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
scenario analysis and compared
with the losses of peers.
• The level of gross losses (before
recoveries and including losses
on credit portfolio caused by
operational risk) experienced by
the institution in recent years has
been not material/very low or
has decreased from a higher
level.
responsibilities and a clear
separation of tasks
between risk-takers and
management and control
functions.
• Operational risk
framework includes all
relevant risks.
• Operational risk
measurement, monitoring
and reporting systems are
appropriate.
• The control framework for
operational risk is sound.
2
There is a medium-
low risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The institution’s operational risk
exposures are mainly in high-
frequency/low-severity impact
categories.
• The significance of the
institution’s exposure to
operational risk is low to
medium, as shown by scenario
analysis and compared with the
losses of peers.
• The level of gross losses
experienced by the institution in
recent years has been low to
medium, or is expected to
increase from a lower historic
level or decrease from a higher
historic level.
3
There is a medium -
high risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The institution’s operational risk
exposures extend to some low-
frequency/high-severity impact
categories.
• The significance of the
institution’s exposure to
operational risk is medium to
high, as shown by scenario
analysis and compared with the
losses of peers.
• The level of gross losses
experienced by the institution in
recent years has been medium to
high, or is expected to increase
from a lower historic level or
decrease from a higher historic
level.
• The consistency between
the institution’s
operational risk policy and
strategy and its overall
strategy and risk appetite
is not sufficiently
developed or even
inadequate.
• The organisational
framework for operational
risk is not sufficiently
robust.
• Operational risk
framework does not
include all relevant risks.

[Page 126]
126
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
4
There is a high risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The institution’s operational risk
exposures extend to all main
categories.
• The significance of the
institution’s exposure to
operational risk is high and
increasing, as shown by scenario
analysis and compared with the
losses of peers.
• The level of gross losses
experienced by the institution
over the last few years has been
high, or risk has significantly
increased.
• Operational risk
measurement, monitoring
and reporting systems are
inappropriate.
• The control framework for
operational risk is
tenuous.
6.5 Assessment of interest rate risk arising from non-trading book
activities
6.5.1 General considerations
327. Competent authorities should assess interest rate risk arising from interest rate-sensitive
positions from non -trading on and off -balance sheet activiti es (commonly referred to as
interest rate risk in the non -trading book, or IRRBB), including hedges for these positions,
irrespective of their recognition and measurement, and irrespective of the recognition and
measurement of losses and gains, for accounting purposes.
328. Competent authorities should consider the relevance and materiality of at least the
following subcategories when assessing IRRBB:
a. Gap risk – risk resulting from the term structure of interest rate sensitive
instruments that arises from diffe rences in the timing of their rate changes,
covering changes to the term structure of interest rates occurring consistently
across the yield curve (parallel risk) or differentially by period (non-parallel risk).
b. Basis risk – risk arising from the impact of relative changes in interest rates on
interest rate sensitive instruments that have similar tenors but are priced using
different interest rate indices. It arises from the imperfect correlation in the
adjustment of the rates earned and paid on different i nterest rate sensitive
instruments with otherwise similar rate change characteristics.
c. Option risk – risk arising from options (embedded and explicit) , where by the
institution or its customer can alter the level and timing of their cash flows, namely

[Page 127]
127
the r isk arising from interest rate sensitive instruments where the holder will
almost certainly exercise the option if it is in their financial interest to do so
(embedded or explicit automatic option s) and the risk arising from flexibility
embedded implicitly or within the terms of interest rate sensitive instruments, such
that changes in interest rates may affect a change in the behaviour of the client
(embedded behavioural option risk).
329. Competent authorities should take into account whether the guidance esta blished in the
EBA Guidelines on IRRBB 38 are implemented prudently by the institution. This applies
particularly to the institution’s internal interest rate risk identification, evaluation,
management and mitigation.
330. Assessment of IRRBB should be differentiated from assessment of credit spread risk arising
from positions in the non -trading book (commonly referred to as CSRBB) that competent
authorities should also conduct. In particular, competent authorities should take into account
whether institutions’ internal systems adequately assess and monitor the risk from CSRBB from
an economic value and net interest income perspective39.
6.5.2 Assessment of inherent IRRBB
331. Through the assessment of the inherent level of IRRBB, competent authorities should
determine the main drivers of the institution’s IRRBB exposure and evaluate the potential
prudential impact of this risk on the institution. The assessment of inherent IRRBB should be
structured around the following main steps:
a. preliminary assessment;
b. assessment of the nature and composition of the institution’s interest rate risk
profile; and
c. assessment of the outcome of the supervisory outlier tests and supervisory stress
tests, as well as the institution’s interest rate shock scenarios and interest rate
stress scenarios.
Preliminary assessment
332. To determine the scope of the IRRBB assessment, competent authorities should first
identify the sources of IRRBB to which the institution is or might be exposed. To do so,
competent authorities should leverage the k nowledge gained from ICAAP and ILAAP
information collected for SREP purposes, from reporting established on IRRBB, from the
38 EBA Guidelines on the management of interest rate risk arising from non-trading book activities (EBA/GL/2018/02)
39 Further guidance on the CSRBB framework will be provided in the revised EBA guidelines that will be developed in
implementation of the mandate envisaged by Article 84 of Directive 2013/36/EU.

[Page 128]
128
assessment of other SREP elements, from the comparison of the institution’s position with
those of its peers and from any other supervisory activities.
333. As a minimum, competent authorities should consider:
a. the institution’s governance of interest rate risk, including its main IRRBB strategy
and its risk appetite in relation to IRRBB;
b. the impact of the supervisory outlier tests stipulat ed in Article 98(5) of Directive
2013/36/EU and further specified by means of the delegated regulation adopted
in accordance with in Article 98(5a) of that Directive;
c. the impact on net interest income and economic value from a change in interest
rates according to the methodology used by the institution, either on the basis of
the (simplified) standardised methodology or on the basis of internal systems
further specified by means of the delegated regulation adopted and the EBA
guidelines adopted in accorda nce with Article 84(5) and (6) of Directive
2013/36/EU; and
d. the internal capital – where relevant – allocated to IRRBB, both in total and as a
proportion of the institution’s total internal capital according to its ICAAP, including
the historical trend and forecasts.
334. In their preliminary assessment, competent authorities should also consider significant
changes in the institution’s exposures to IRRBB. As a minimum, they should assess the following
aspects:
a. significant changes in the institution’s overall IRRBB strategy, risk appetite, policy
or limit sizes;
b. the potential impact on the institution’s risk profile of those changes;
c. major changes in the institution’s modelling, customer behaviour or use of interest
rate derivatives and
d. major market trends.
Nature and composition of the institution’s interest rate risk profile
335. Competent authorities should form a clear view on how changes in interest rates can have
an adverse impact on an institution’s net interes t income (and, where relevant, its earnings)
and economic value (the present value of expected cash flows) to gain both a short-term and a
longer-term view on the possible threat to capital adequacy.

[Page 129]
129
336. For this purpose, competent authorities should analyse and form a clear view on the
structure of the institution’s assets, liabilities and , where available , off-balance-sheet
exposures. In particular:
a. the different positions in the non-trading book, their maturities or repricing dates,
and behavioural assumptions (e.g. assumptions regarding products with uncertain
maturity) in relation to these positions;
b. the institution’s interest cash flows;
c. the proportion of products with uncertain maturity, and products with explicit
and/or embedded options, paying particular attention to products with embedded
customer optionality; and
d. the hedging strategy of the institution and the amount and use of derivatives for
hedging purposes.
337. To better determine the complexity and the interest rate risk profile of the institution,
competent authorities should also understand the main features of the institution’s assets,
liabilities and off-balance-sheet exposures, in particular:
a. loan portfolio (e.g. volume of loans with no maturity, volume of loans with pre -
payment options, volume of floating -rate loans with caps and floors, share of
floating rate loan contracts that prevent repricing at negative rates, etc.);
b. bond portfolio (e.g. volume of investments with options, possible concentrations);
c. non-performing exposures;
d. deposit accounts (e.g. sensitivity of the institution’s deposit base to changes in
interest rates including core deposits, possible concentrations);
e. derivatives (e.g. complexity of the derivatives, considerations relating to sold or
bought interest rate options, impact of derivatives on the duration of non -trading
book positions); and
f. nature of IRRBB embedded in fair value instruments, including less liquid
instruments such as Level 3 assets and liabilities.
338. When analysing the impact on the institution’s earnings, competent authorities should
consider the institution’s different sources of income and expenses and their relative weights
to total revenues. They should be aware of how m uch the institution’s returns depend on
interest rate-sensitive positions, and they should determine how different changes in interest
rates would affect the institution’s net interest income , as well as determining the effects of
changes in the market val ue of instruments – depending on accounting treatment – either

[Page 130]
130
shown in the profit and loss (P&L) account or directly in equity (e.g. via other comprehensive
income).
339. When analysing the impact on the institution’s economic value and earnings, competent
authorities should first consider the results of the supervisory outlier tests stipulated in Article
98(5) of Directive 2013/36/EU and further specified in the delegated regulation adopted in
accordance with Article 98(5a) of that Directive, to get an initia l benchmark against which to
compare how interest rate changes would affect the institution. When performing this
assessment, competent authorities should pay particular attention to the sensitivity of cash
flows to repricing, in terms of both their timing and amount, to changes in the underlying key
assumptions (particularly for customer accounts without specific repricing dates, customer
accounts with embedded customer optionality and/or equity capital).
340. Competent authorities should seek to understand th e impact of those assumptions and
then isolate the economic value and earnings risks arising from the institution’s behavioural
adjustments.
341. Competent authorities should pay attention to the sensitivity of cash flows to changes in
the valuation of fair val ue instruments in the non -trading book, including interest rate
derivatives used for the hedging of non -trading book instruments (e.g. impact of mark -to-
market changes in fair value instruments on P&L, hedge account effectiveness).
342. In addition to using th e supervisory outlier test stipulated in Article 98(5) of Directive
2013/36/EU and further specified in the delegated regulation adopted in accordance with
Article 98(5a) of that Directive competent authorities may require institutions to take into
account other interest rate shock scenarios.
343. In their quantitative assessment, competent authorities should also consider the results of
the institution’s internal or standardised methodologies for measuring IRRBB, where
appropriate. Through the analysis of these methodologies, competent authorities should gain
a deeper understanding of the main risk factors underlying the institution’s IRRBB profile.
344. Competent authorities should assess whether those institutions operating in different
currencies perform an analy sis of the interest rate risk in each currency in which they have a
significant position. Competent authorities should also assess the approaches that the se
institutions use for the purpose of aggregating the results of economic value and earnings
measures in individual currencies.
345. When analysing the results of both the impact of the supervisory outlier tests and the
institution’s internal or standardised methodologies, competent authorities should consider
‘point in time’ figures as well as historical trends. These rates should be compared to peers and
considered in the context of the global market situation.
Shock scenarios and stress testing

[Page 131]
131
346. Competent authorities should assess and take into account the results of the interest rate
shock scenarios and stress tests (in addition to those of the supervisory outlier tests) performed
by the institution as part of its ongoing internal management process. In th is context,
competent authorities should be aware of the main sources of the institution’s IRRBB.
347. If, when the outcome of the institution’s shock scenarios and stress tests is reviewed,
particular accumulations of repricing/maturity at different points on the curve are revealed or
suspected, competent authorities may need to carry out additional analyses.
6.5.3 Assessment of IRRBB management and controls (both risk management and
compliance, and internal audit control functions)
348. To achieve a comprehensive understanding of the institution’s interest rate risk profile in
the non-trading book, competent authorities should review the governance and framework
underlying its interest rate exposures.
349. Competent authorities should assess the following elements:
a. IRRBB strategy and appetite (as distinct elements or as part of the broader market
risk strategy and appetite);
b. organisational framework and responsibilities;
c. policies and procedures;
d. risk identification, measurement including internal models, monitoring and
reporting; and
e. internal control framework.
IRRBB strategy and appetite
350. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has a sound, clearly
formulated and documented IRRBB strategy, approved by the management body. For this
assessment, competent authorities should take into account:
a. whether the management body clearly expresses the IRRBB strategy and appetite
and the process for the review thereof (e.g. in the event of an overall review of risk
strategy, or concerns about profitability or capital adequacy), and whether senior
management prope rly implements the IRRBB strategy approved by the
management body, ensuring that the institution’s activities are consistent with the
established strategy, written procedures are drawn up and implemented, and
responsibilities are clearly and properly assigned;
b. whether the institution’s IRRBB strategy properly reflects the institution’s appetite
for IRRBB and whether it is consistent with the overall risk appetite;

[Page 132]
132
c. whether the institution’s IRRBB strategy and appetite are appropriate for the
institution considering:
• its business model;
• its overall risk strategy and appetite;
• its market environment and role in the financial system; and
• its capital adequacy;
d. whether the institution’s IRRBB strategy broadly covers all the activities of the
institution where IRRBB is significant;
e. whether the institution’s IRRBB strategy takes into account the cyclical aspects of
the economy and the resulting shifts in the composition of IRRBB activities; and
f. whether the institution has an appropriate framework in place to ensure t hat the
IRRBB strategy is effectively communicated to relevant staff.
Organisational framework and responsibilities
351. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate
organisational framework and clearly assigned responsibilitie s for IRRBB management,
measurement, monitoring and control functions with adequate human and technical
resources. They should take into account whether:
a. there are clear lines of responsibility for the overall management of IRRBB, and for
taking, monitoring, controlling and reporting IRRBB;
b. the IRRBB management and control area is subject to independent review and is
clearly identified in the organisation and functionally and hierarchically
independent of the business area; and
c. the staff dealing with interest rate risk (both in the business area and in the
management and control areas) have appropriate skills and experience.
Policies and procedures
352. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has clearly defined policies
and procedures for the management of IRRBB that are consistent with its IRRBB strategy and
appetite. They should take into account whether:
a. the management body approves the policies for managing, measuring and
controlling IRRBB and discusses and reviews them regularly in line with risk
strategies;

[Page 133]
133
b. senior management is responsible for developing policies and procedures and
ensuring adequate implementation of the management body’s decisions;
c. IRRBB policies are compliant with relevant regulations and adequate for the nature
and complexity of the institution’s activities, enabling a clear understanding of the
inherent IRRBB;
d. such policies are clearly formalised and communicated and applied consistently
across the institution;
e. these policies are applied consistently across banki ng groups and allow proper
management of IRRBB;
f. IRRBB policies define the procedures for new product development, major hedging
or risk management initiatives and such policies have been approved by the
management body or its appropriate delegated committe e. In particular,
competent authorities should ensure that:
• new products and new major hedging and risk management initiatives are
subject to adequate procedures and controls before being introduced or
undertaken; and
• the institution has undertaken an anal ysis of their possible impact in its
overall risk profile.
Risk identification, measurement including internal models, monitoring and reporting
353. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate
framework for identifying, evalua ting, managing and mitigating IRRBB, in line with the level,
complexity and riskiness of non -trading book positions and the institution’s size and
complexity. The assessment should encompass internal models, such as those related to
customer behaviour (e.g. models of deposit stability and loan early repayment). They should
consider the following:
a. Whether the information systems and measurement techniques enable
management to measure the inherent IRRBB in all its material on- and off-balance-
sheet exposures (where relevant at group level), including internal hedges, in the
non-trading book portfolio.
b. Whether the institution has adequate staff and methodologies to measure IRRBB
(in accordance with the requirements of the EBA Guidelines on IRRBB), taking into
account the size, form and complexity of their interest rate risk exposure.

[Page 134]
134
c. Whether the internal systems implemented by the institution for the purpose of
evaluating IRRBB in the context of Article 84(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU are
satisfactory, also having regard to the EBA Guidelines on IRRBB.
d. Whether the assumptions underlying internal models and methodologies take into
account the guidance established by the EBA Guidelines on IRRBB. In particular,
competent authorities should assess whether the institution’s assumptions
regarding positions with no contractual maturity and embedded customer options
are prudent. Competent authorities should also assess whether institutions include
equity in the calculation of economic value and, if they do, analyse the impact of
removing equity from that calculation.
e. Whether the institution’s risk measurement systems take into account all material
forms of interest rate risk to which the institution is exposed (e.g. gap risk, basis
risk and option risk). If some instruments and/or factors are excluded from the risk
measurement systems, institutions should be able to explain why to supervisors
and to quantify the materiality of the exclusions.
f. Whether institution’s internal models used for the measurement of IRRBB have
been properly developed, independently validated (including whether any expert
opinions and judgement employed in the internal models have been thoroughly
assessed), backtested (to the extent possible) and reviewed regularly.
g. The quality, detail and timeliness of the information provided by the information
systems and whether the systems are able to aggregate the risk figures for all the
portfolios, activities and entities included in the consolidation perimeter.
Information systems should comply with the guidance established by the EBA
Guidelines on IRRBB.
h. The integrity and timeliness o f the data that feed the risk measurement process,
which should also comply with the guidance established by the EBA Guidelines on
IRRBB.
i. Whether the institution’s risk measurement systems are able to identify possible
IRRBB concentrations (e.g. in certain time buckets).
j. Whether risk managers and the institution’s senior management understand the
assumptions underlying the measurement systems, especially with regard to
positions with uncertain contractual maturity and those with implicit or explicit
options, as well as the institution’s assumptions for equity capital.
k. Whether risk managers and the institution’s senior management are aware of the
degree of model risk that prevails in the institution’s risk measurement techniques.

[Page 135]
135
l. Whether the use of interest r ate derivatives is compliant with the IRRBB risk
strategy and whether those activities are performed within the risk appetite
framework and with adequate internal governance arrangements in place.
354. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has implemented adequate
stress test scenarios that complement its risk measurement system. In their assessment, they
should evaluate compliance with the relevant guidance established in the EBA guidelines issued
in accordance with Article 98(5) of Directive 2013/36/EU.
355. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate
monitoring and internal reporting framework for IRRBB that ensures there is prompt action at
the appro priate level of the institution’s senior management or management body, where
necessary. The monitoring system should include specific indicators and relevant triggers to
provide effective early warning alerts. Competent authorities should take into account whether
the management and control area reports regularly (the frequency will depend on the scale,
complexity and level of IRRBB exposures) to the management body and senior management
the following information, as a minimum:
a. an overview of the current I RRBB exposures, P&L results and risk calculation, and
the drivers of level and direction of IRRBB;
b. significant breaches of IRRBB limits;
c. changes in the major assumptions or parameters on which the procedures for
assessing IRRBB are based;
d. changes in the interest rate derivatives position and whether these are related to
changes in the underlying hedging strategy; and
e. information on the performance of the models used.
Internal control framework
356. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has a strong and
comprehensive control framework and sound safeguards to mitigate its exposures to IRRBB in
line with its risk management strategy and risk appetite. They should take into account:
a. whether the scope of the institution’s control function includes all consolidated
entities, all geographical locations and all financial activities;
b. whether there are internal controls, operating limits and other practices aimed at
keeping IRRBB exposures at or below levels acceptable to the institution, in
accordance with the parameters set by the management body and senior
management and the institution’s risk appetite; and

[Page 136]
136
c. whether the institution has appropriate internal controls and practices to ensure
that breaches of and exceptions to policies, procedures and limits are reported in
a timely manner to the appropriate level of management for action.
357. Competent authorities should assess the limit system, including whether:
a. it is consistent with the risk management strategy and risk appetite of the
institution;
b. it is adequate for the complexity of the institution’s organisation and IRRBB
exposures, and for its ability to measure and manage this risk;
c. it addresses the potential impact of changes in interest rates on earnings and the
institution’s economic value (from an earning s perspective, limits should specify
acceptable levels of volatility for earnings under specified interest rate scenarios;
the form of limits for addressing the effect of rates on an i nstitution’s economic
value should be appropriate for the size and complexity of the institution’s
activities and underlying positions);
d. the limits established are absolute or whether breaches of limits are possible (in
the latter case, the institution’s policies should clearly set out the period of time
during which and the specific circumstances under which such breaches of limits
are possible; competent authorities should request information about measures
that ensure limits are adhered to); and
e. the institution has adequate procedures for reviewing its limits regularly.
358. Competent authorities should assess the functionality of the internal audit function. To this
end, they should assess whether:
a. the institution conducts internal audits of the IRRBB management framework on a
regular basis;
b. the internal audit covers the main elements of IRRBB management, measurement
and control across the institution; and
c. the internal audit function is effective in determining adherence to internal policies
and the relevant external regulations and addressing any deviations.
6.5.4 Summary of findings and scoring
359. Following the above assessment s, competent authorities should form a view on the
institution’s IRRBB. This view should be reflected in a summary of findings, accomp anied by a
score based on the considerations specified in Table 7. If, based on the materiality of certain
risk subcategories, the competent authority decides to assess and score them individually, the
guidance provided in this table should be applied, as far as possible, by analogy.

[Page 137]
137
Table 7. Supervisory considerations for assigning a score to IRRBB
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
1
There is a low risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The sensitivity of the economic
value to changes in interest rates
is not material/very low.
• The sensitivity of earnings to
changes in interest rates is no t
material/very low.
• The sensitivity of the economic
value and earnings to changes in
the underlying assumptions (e.g.
in the case of products with
embedded customer optionality)
is not material/very low.
• There is c onsistency
between the institution’s
interest rate risk policy
and strategy and its
overall strategy and risk
appetite.
• The organisational
framework for interest
rate risk is robust with
clear responsibilities and a
clear separation of tasks
between risk-takers and
management and control
functions.
• Interest rate risk
measurement, monitoring
and reporting systems are
appropriate.
• Internal limits and the
control framework for
interest rate risk are
sound and are in line with
the institution’s risk
strategy and risk appetite.
2
There is a medium-
low risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The sensitivity of the economic
value to changes in interest rates
is low to medium.
• The sensitivity of earnings to
changes in interest rates is low to
medium.
• The sensitivity of the economic
value and earnings to changes in
the underlying assumptions (e.g.
in the case of products with
embedded customer optionality)
is low to medium.
3
There is a medium -
high risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The sensitivity of the economic
value to changes in interest rates
is medium to high.
• The sensitivity of earnings to
changes in interest rates is
medium to high.
• The sensitivity of the economic
value and earnings to changes in
the underlying assumptions (e.g.
in the case of products with
embedded customer optionality)
is medium to high.
• There is inconsistency
between the institution’s
interest rate risk policy
and strategy and its
overall strategy and risk
appetite.
• The organisational
framework for interest
rate risk does not
sufficiently separate
responsibilities and tasks
between risk -takers and
management and control
functions.
• Interest rate risk
measurement, monitoring
and reporting systems are
not undertaken with
4
There is a high risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
• The sensitivity of the economic
value to changes in interest rates
is high.
• The sensitivity of earnings to
changes in interest rates is high.
• The sensitivity of the economic
value and earnings to changes in

[Page 138]
138
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
the management and
controls.
the underlying assumptions (e.g.
in the case of products with
embedded customer optionality)
is high.
sufficient accuracy and
frequency.
• Internal limits and the
control framework for
interest rate risk are not in
line with the institution’s
risk strategy and risk
appetite.

[Page 139]
139
SREP capital assessment
7.1 General considerations
360. Competent authorities should determine through the SREP capital assessment whether the
own funds held by the institution provide sound coverage of risks to capital to which the
institution is or might be exposed, if such risks are assessed as material to the institution.
361. Competent authorities should do this by determining and setting the quantity (amount)
and quality (composition) of additional own funds the institution is required to hold to cover
institution-specific risks and elements of risks that are not covered or not sufficiently covered
by Parts Three, Four and Seven of Regulation (EU ) No 575/2013 and Chapter 2 of Regulation
(EU) 2017/2402 (‘Pillar 1 own funds requirements’), and, where necessary, own funds
requirements to address deficiencies in models, controls, governance or other deficiencies, as
well as risk arising from the institution’s business model (‘additional own funds requirements’).
Additional own funds requirements should be met by the institution at all times.
362. To address potential capital inadequacies, including in stressed conditions, competent
authorities should take appropriate supervisory meas ures, including, where relevant,
establishing and communicating P2G which is the quantity (amount) and quality (composition)
of own funds that the institution is expected to hold over and above its OCR or its OLRR.
363. When setting the additional own funds requirements and, where relevant, guidance ,
competent authorities should:
a. take into account any supervisory measures that the competent authority has applied
or is planning to apply to an institution in accordance with Chapter 10 and having
regard to paragraphs 386 to 389;
b. clearly justify all elements of additional own funds requirements for P2R and P2R-LR
as well as for P2G and P2G-LR;
c. apply P2R and P2R -LR as well as P2G and P2G-LR in a consistent manner to ensure
broad consistency of prudential outcomes across institutions.
364. Competent authorities should assess the adequacy of the institution’s own funds and the
impact of economic stress thereon, as well as risks posed by excessive leverage, as a key
determinant of the institution’s viability. This determinat ion should be summarised and
reflected in a score based on the criteria specified at the end of this title.
The SREP capital assessment process

[Page 140]
140
365. After considering the outcomes of the assessment of risks to capital as specified in Title 6,
competent authorit ies should undertake the following steps as part of the SREP capital
assessment process:
a. determination of additional own funds requirements for risks other than the risk
of excessive leverage;
b. assessment of the risk of excessive leverage and determination of additional own
funds requirements to address this risk;
c. reconciliation of P2R , P2R -LR, P2G and P2G-LR with the capital buffers and any
macroprudential requirements;
d. determination of TSCR, TSLRR and OCR, OLRR;
e. articulation and justification of own funds requirements;
f. assessment of whether TSCR, TSLRR and OCR, OLRR can be met in stressed
conditions;
g. determination of P2G and P2G LR;
h. determination of the capital adequacy score.
7.2 Determining additional own funds requirements for risks other
than the risk of excessive leverage
366. Competent authorities should determine additional own funds requirements for risks other
than the risk of excessive leverage, where they identify any of the situations listed in Article
104a(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU for an institution, including in particular:
a. the risk of unexpected losses, and of expected losses insufficiently covered by
provisions, over a 12 -month period (except where Regulation (EU ) No 575/2013
specifies own funds requirements over a different period) (‘unexpected losses’),
which individual institutions are facing due to their activities, including those
reflecting the impact of certain economic and market developments;
b. model deficiencies as assessed in the context of Article 101 of Directive
2013/36/EU; and
c. deficiencies in internal governance, including internal control arrangements and
other deficiencies , as well as risk arising from the institution’s business model,
identified following the risk assessment outlined in Titles 4 to 6.
7.2.1 Determining additional own funds to cover unexpected losses

[Page 141]
141
367. When setting additional own funds requirements for the risk of unexpected losses pursuant
to point (a) of paragraph 366, competent authorities should consider each type of risk that may
pose a material risk to the institution’s capital. Competent authorities should set additional
own funds required to cover the risk of unexpected losses by determining the capital
considered adequate to cover the type of risk and deducting the relevant part of own funds
requirements set out in Parts Three and Four of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and Chapter 2 of
Regulation (EU) 2017/2402.
368. For the purpose of the previous paragraph, competent au thorities should determine on a
risk-by-risk basis, the amounts of capital considered adequate, by identifying, assessing and
quantifying the risks to which the institution is exposed and they should take into account the
full risk profile of an institutio n. The determination of the amounts of capital considered
adequate should include:
a. institution-specific risks or elements of such risks that are explicitly excluded from
or not explicitly addressed by the Pillar 1 own funds requirements;
b. institution-specific risks or elements of such risks that are considered not to be
sufficiently covered by the applicable Pillar 1 own funds requirements.
369. Competent authorities should ensure that the amount of capital considered adequate to
cover each risk identified in ac cordance with Articles 79 to 85 of Directive 2013/36/EU is not
lower than the relevant part of the applicable Pillar 1 own funds requirement covering that
risk. In exceptional cases where it is overly burdensome, especially for small institutions, to
meaningfully disentangle the amount of capital considered adequate for two or more types of
risk quantified together, competent authorities should comply with the first sentence of this
paragraph on a best -effort basis, using the ICAAP calculations, supervisory judgement and
other sources of information, by determining the level of additional own funds requirements
in a conservative manner, having regard to paragraphs 372 to 374.
370. The identification, assessment and quantification of risks to which the institution is exposed
should be supported by the following sources of information:
a. the ICAAP and the outcomes of its assessment by the competent authority,
including the ICAAP calculations where deemed reliable or partially reliable in
accordance with paragraphs 375 to 377;
b. supervisory reporting;
c. the outcome of supervisory assessment and benchmarking;
d. the outcomes of any relevant previous supervisory activities; and
e. other relevant inputs, including those arising from interaction and dialogue with
the institution.

[Page 142]
142
371. The ICAAP and outcomes of its assessment should be taken into account by competent
authorities as one of the key inputs for the identification and assessment of risks relevant for
the institution. The determination of the amount of capital considered adequate and
additional own funds requirements on a risk-by-risk basis should take into account the ICAAP
calculations if deemed reliable or partially reliable , as well as the outcomes of supervisory
benchmarking and other relevant inputs as appropriate, including the supervisory judgement.
372. Competent authorities should not allow own funds held pursuant to Article 92 of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 to be used to meet or offset additional own funds requirements
both on an aggregate and on a risk-by-risk basis.
373. For the purposes of Article 98(1), point (f) of Directive 2013/36/EU and the determination
of additional own funds requirements, competent authorities should assess and consider
diversification effects arising from geographical, sectoral or any other relevant drivers within
each material risk category (intra-risk diversification). For each of the risks to capital covered
by Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, such diversification effects should not reduce the minimum
own funds requirements calculated in accordance with Article 92 of Regulation (EU) No
575/2013.
374. However, diversification between risks in different categories, including those covered by
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (inter-risk diversification) should not be considered as part of the
determination of additional own funds requirements.
ICAAP calculations
375. Competent authorities should assess the reliability of the ICAAP calculations by assessing
whether they are:
a. Granular: the calculations/methodologies should allow the calculations to be
broken down by risk type, rather than presenting a single (economic capital)
calculation covering all risks. This breakdown should be enabled by the ICAAP
methodology itself. Risks should not be excluded from the ICAAP where they are
difficult to quantify or where relevant data are not available ; estimates may be
provided based on available information and including expert judgement . Where
deemed appropriate by the competent authority , estimates may be provided
through marginal contribution calculations , for example, for risks that cannot be
measured on a standalone basis (e.g. credit concentration risk).
b. Credible: the calculations/methodologies used should demonstrably cover the risk
they are looking to address (e.g. the credit concentration risk calculation should
use appropriate sector breakdown s that reflect actual correlations and portfolio
compositions) and should be sufficiently robust, stable, risk sensitive and
conservative to adequately quantify losses associated with the risks. Such

[Page 143]
143
calculations/methodologies should be consistent with the institutions’ strategic
processes, including the institutions’ risk appetite.
c. Understandable: the underlying drivers of the calculations/methodologies should
be clearly specified. A ‘black box’ calculation should not be acceptable. Competent
authorities should ensure that t he institution provide s an explanation of the key
assumptions used, including at least time horizon, confidence levels, correlation
assumptions, key parameters, the most fallible areas of the models used, and how
these are accounted for and corrected in the final ICAAP calculation.
d. Comparable: the calculations/methodologies should clearly mention the main
assumptions in terms of the overall level of conservatism, the holding periods/risk
horizons and confidence levels (or equivalent measurement) in order to allow the
adjustment that may be requested or enacted by competent authorities in order
to facilitate comparability with peers and supervisory benchmarking.
376. Competent authorities should further assess the reliability of the ICAAP calculations by
comparing them against the outcome of the supervisory benchmarks for the same risks, and
other relevant inputs.
377. An ICAAP calculation should be considered partially reliable where, despite not meeting all
the above criteria , the calculation still seems highly credible, though this should be on an
exceptional basis and accompanied by steps to improve deficiencies identified in the ICAAP
calculation.
Supervisory benchmarks
378. Competent authorities should develop and apply risk-specific supervisory benchmarks as a
means to challenge ICAAP calculations for those material risks, or elements of such risks, that
are not covered or not sufficiently covered by Regulation (EU ) No 575 /2013, or to further
support the determination of risk-by-risk additional own funds requirement, especially where
ICAAP calculations for those material risks, or elements of such risks, are deemed unreliable or
are unavailable.
379. The supervisory benchmarks should be developed to provide a prudent, consistent (i.e., as
applicable, calibrated to equivalent holding periods/risk horizons and confidence levels as
required by Regulation (EU ) No 575/2013), transparent and comparable measure with which
to calculate and compare across institutions the capital considered adequate for a given type
of risk.
380. Given the variety of different business models operated by institutions, the outcome of the
supervisory benchmarks may not be appropriate in every instance for every institution.
Competent authorities should address this by using the most appropriate bench mark where
alternatives are available, and by applying judgement to the outcome of the benchmark to
account for business-model-specific and institution-specific considerations.

[Page 144]
144
381. When competent authorities take supervisory benchmarks into consideration for t he
determination of additional own funds requirements, as part of the dialogue , they should
explain to the institution the rationale and general underlying principles behind the
benchmarks.
Other relevant inputs
382. Competent authorities should use other rele vant inputs to support the determination of
risk-by-risk additional own funds requirements. Other relevant inputs may include the
outcomes of risk assessments (following the criteria specified in Title 6), peer -group
comparisons, including report(s) issued by the EBA pursuant to the requirements of Article 78
of Directive 2013/36/EU, benchmarks issued by the EBA pursuant to Article 101 of Directive
2013/36/EU, etc.
383. Other relevant inputs should prompt the competent authority to reassess the
appropriateness/reliability of an ICAAP/supervisory benchmarks for a specific risk, and/or make
adjustments to the outcome, where they prompt doubts about its accuracy (e.g. where the risk
score implies a significantly different level of risk relative to the calculation, or where peer
reviews reveal that the institution differs significantly from p eers in terms of the own funds
requirement to cover a comparable risk exposure).
384. To ensure consistency in determining additional risk-by-risk own funds requirements,
competent authorities should use the same peer groups established to analyse risks to capital
as specified in Title 6.
385. When competent authorities take other relevant inputs into consideration for the
determination of additional own funds requirements, as part of the dialogue, they should
explain to the institution the rationale and general unde rlying principles behind the inputs
used.
7.2.2 Determining own funds or other measures to cover model deficiencies
386. If, during the ongoing review of internal approaches pursuant to the requirements of
Article 101 of Directive 2013/36/EU, or through the peer analysis conducted pursuant to
Article 78 of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities identify model deficienci es that
could lead to underestimation of the minimum own funds requirements set by Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013, they should set additional own funds requirements for model deficiencies that
could lead to underestimation of risk where this is determined to be more appropriate than
other supervisory measures. Competent authorities should only set additional own funds
requirements to cover these deficiencies, where it is not possible to address them under Pillar
1 own funds requirements through other supervisory measures, such as requiring institutions
to adjust their models or apply an appropriate margin of conservatism to their estimates. Such
additional own funds requirements should only be set as an interim measure while the
deficiencies are addressed.

[Page 145]
145
7.2.3 Determining own funds or other measures to cover other deficiencies
387. Competent authorities should set additional own funds to cover deficiencies in governance,
controls, business model or other deficiencies – identified following the risk assessment
outlined in Titles 4 to 6 – where other supervisory measures are considered insufficient or not
appropriate to ensure compliance with the requirements. Competent authorities should only
set such additional own funds requirements as an interim measure while the deficiencies are
addressed.
388. Competent authorities should only set additional own funds requirements to cover funding
risk – identified following the risk assessment outlined in Title 8 – where this is determined to
be more appropriate than other supervisory measures applied in accordance with Title 9.
389. Where an institution repeatedly fails to establish or maintain an adequate level of own
funds to cover the guidance communicated in accordance with Article 104b(3) of Directive
2013/36/EU, competent authorities should set additional own funds requirements to cover
that additional risk not later than 2 years after the breach of guidance. Competent authorities
may postpone that decision where they allow institutions to operate below the level of
guidance due to economic or market conditions or institution -specific circumstances, in line
with paragraphs 584 and 585.
7.2.4 Determining the composition of additional own funds requirements
390. Competent authorities should set the composition of additional own funds requirements
as at least 56.25% Common Equity Tier 1 (CET1) and at least 75% Tier 1. Competent authorities
may set the composition of additional own funds requirements for all risks other than the risk
of excessive leverage on an aggregated level.
391. Where necessary, and having regard to the specific circumstances of an institution,
competent authorities may require institutions to cover additional own funds requirements
with a higher quality of capital than that referred to in paragraph 390. Any imposition of a
higher quality of capital should be justified, taking into account the individual risk situation of
the institution and consideration of risks that may require high quality of capital to cover
potential losses.
7.3 Additional own funds requirements for the risk of excessive
leverage
392. In accordance with Article 104a (3) and (4) of Directive 2013/36/EU 40 , competent
authorities should assess the risk of exce ssive leverage separately from other types of risk.
Where, as a result of such an assessment , competent authorities determine additional own
40 Further explained in recital 15 of Directive (EU) 2019/878 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 May
2019 amending Directive 2013/36/EU as regards exempted entities, financial holding companies, mixed financial holding
companies, remuneration, supervisory measures and powers and capital conservation measures, OJ L 150, 7.6.2019, p.
253.

[Page 146]
146
funds requirement to address the risk of excessive leverage, they should add this requirement
to the own funds requirement based on the leverage ratio as set out in Article 92(1) point (d)
of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and not to the own funds requirements based on the total risk
exposure amount (TREA) as set out in points (a) to (c) of that paragraph of the article.
Competent authorities should consider the leverage ratio requirement and the additional own
funds requirement to address the risk of excessive leverage as a separate stack from the TREA-
based requirements and additional own funds requirements for all other types of risk ( i.e.
available own funds can simultaneously be used to meet requirements in the TREA-based stack
and in the leverage ratio-based stack of own funds requirements).
7.3.1 Assessment of risk of excessive leverage
393. In line with the concept of the leverage ratio (and its stack of requirements) as a backstop
to the TREA-based own funds requirements, in the assessment of the risk of excessive leverage
as defined in Article 4(1) , point (93) and (94) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, competent
authorities should focus on potential material vulnerabilities not covered or not sufficiently
covered by the own funds requirements as set out in Article 92(1) point (d) of Regulation (EU)
575/2013 that may require corrective measures to the business activities of the institution, that
were not envisaged in its business plan.
394. In assessing the risk of excessive leverage, competent authorities should consider all of the
following aspects and they should adapt the depth of the assessment of each aspect depending
on its relevance for the institution:
a. elements of risk of excessive leverage that are considered not covered or not
sufficiently covered by the leverage ratio own funds requirement set out in Article
92(1) point (d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, as a result of in particular:
i. regulatory arbitrage / optimisation of the leverage ratio by exchanging
exposures counted in the leverage ratio for economically similar exposures
that may be less counted in the leverage ratio exposure calculation;
ii. regulatory arbitrage / optimisation by m inimising the leverage ratio
exposure in the form of temporary reductions of transaction volumes in
key financial markets (particularly in the money market, of certain activities
such as SFTs, but also in the derivative market) around reference dates
resulting in the reporting41 and public disclosure of elevated leverage ratios
(‘window-dressing activities’); and
iii. specific features of the business model, business activities or other bank
idiosyncrasies that either increase or decrease the extent to which the
41 To provide insight, Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/451 of 17 December 2020 introduces template
C48.00 with daily values for SFTs in COREP in regard of large institutions. Further note that extensive daily data is reported
to trade repositories in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2019/363 of 13 December 2018
(regarding SFTs) and in accordance with Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) No 1247/2012 of 19 December 2012
(regarding derivatives).

[Page 147]
147
institution is exposed to the risk of excessive leverage (e.g. as per the
aspects in paragraph 393) but are not covered or not sufficiently covered
in the calculatio n of the leverage ratio. Competent authorities should
consider, where applicable, high exposures to written options on equity or
short positions via credit derivatives that may have an elevated exposure
to peak losses , as these positions are not fully capt ured in the leverage
ratio exposure (in contrast to, for example, written credit derivatives), and
concentrations in certain off-balance sheet items where the idiosyncrasies
inherent to the business activities of the institution may lead to increased
volatility in drawdowns.
b. elements of risk of excessive leverage that are explicitly excluded from or not
explicitly addressed by the leverage ratio own funds requirement, including due to
the exclusions listed in Article 429a of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, particularly
where there are concerns about the assessment of continued compliance with the
conditions for these exclusions and where the reliance on a sin gle exclusion is
highly significant for the institution and the amount excluded is unduly volatile;
c. the changes in the institution’s leverage ratio and its components , including the
foreseeable impact of current and future expected losses on the leverage ratio,
taking into account the business model of the institution.
7.3.2 Determination of additional own funds requirement to address the risk of
excessive leverage
395. On the basis of the assessment performed under Section 7.3.1 of these Guidelines ,
competent authorities should determine the additional own funds requirements to address the
risk of excessive leverage as the difference between the capital considered adequate to cover
the risk of excessive leverage and the leverage ratio own funds requirements as set out in
Article 92(1) point (d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. This amount cannot be negative.
396. When setting additional own funds requirements to address the risk of excessive leverage
competent authorities should consider in particular:
a. elements of risk of excessive leverage that are considered not covered or not
sufficiently covered by the leverage ratio own funds requirement set out in Article
92(1), point (d) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, particularly where the assessment
of the aspects described in paragraphs 393 or 394 indicate a high vulnerability
when compared to the leverage ratio exposure.
b. elements of risk of excessive le verage that are explicitly excluded from or not
explicitly addressed by the leverage ratio own funds requirement, including due to
the exclusions listed in Article 429a(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 assessed in
accordance with paragraph 394b. Competent authorities should set additional own
funds requirements only in those ca ses, where particularly extensive use of a

[Page 148]
148
certain exclusion results in a level of leverage ratio that does not appropriately
reflect the risk faced by the institution.
397. Competent authorities should ensure that the capital considered adequate to cover the risk
of excessive leverage is not lower than the leverage ratio own funds requirements (i.e. the
additional own funds requirements to address the risk of excessive leverage cannot be
negative).
398. Competent authorities should identify, assess and quantify the risk of excessive leverage
following the sources of information and methods set out in paragraphs 370 and 371, using the
available sources of i nformation to the extent that they are relevant for the risk of excessive
leverage.
7.3.3 Composition of additional own funds requirement to address the risk of excessive
leverage
399. Competent authorities should add the additional own funds requirement to address the
risk of excessive leverage to the minimum leverage ratio Tier 1 requirement . In order to meet
this additional requirement institutions should also be able to use any Tier 1 capital.
400. Where necessary, and having regard to the specific circumstances of an institution,
competent authorities may require institutions to cover additiona l own funds requirements
with a higher quality of capital than that referred to in paragraph 399. Any imposition of a
higher quality of capital should be justified, taking into account the individual risk situation of
the institution and considering situations where materialisation of the risk of excessive leverage
may require a higher quality of capital to cover potential losses.
7.4 Reconciliation with the capital buffers and any macroprudential
requirements
401. In determining additional own funds requirements (or other capital measures), competent
authorities should reconcile the additional own funds requirements with any existing capital
buffer requirements by addressing the same risks or elements of those risks. Competent
authorities should not set addition al own funds requirements or other capital measures
(including P2G) where the same risk is already covered by specific capital buffer requirements.
Any additional own funds requirements or other capital measures should be institution-specific
and should not cover macroprudential or systemic risks. However, in line with Article 104a(1),
point (f) of Directive 2013/36/EU, they can cover the risks reflecting the impact of certain
economic conditions and market developments on the risk profile of an individual institution.
7.5 Determining the TSCR, TSLRR, OCR and OLRR
402. Competent authorities should determine the TSCR (in terms of total own funds) as the sum
of:

[Page 149]
149
a. the own funds requirement pursuant to Article 92(1), point (c) of Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013; and
b. the sum of the additional own funds requirements (determined in accordance with
the criteria specified in Section 7.2) and any additional own funds determined to
be necessary to cover material inter-risk concentrations.
403. Competent authorities should determ ine the TSCR (in terms of Tier 1 capital) as the sum
of:
a. the own funds requirement pursuant to Article 92(1), point (b) of Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013; and
b. the part of the additional own funds requirements referred to in point b of
paragraph 402, which is required by the competent authority to be held in the form
of Tier 1 capital.
404. Competent authorities should determine the TSCR (in terms of CET1) as the sum of:
a. the own funds requirement pursuant to Article 92(1), point (a) of Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013; and
b. the part of the additional own funds requirements, referred to in point b of
paragraph 402, which is required by the competent authority to be held in the form
of CET1 capital.
405. Competent authorities should determine the TSLRR (in terms of Tier 1 capital) as the sum
of:
a. the leverage ratio own funds requirement pursuant to Article 92 (1), point (d) of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013; and
b. the additional own funds required to address the ri sk of excessive leverage
(determined in accordance with the criteria specified in Section 7.3).
406. Where competent authorities require institutions to cover P2R-LR with a higher quality of
capital in line with paragraph 400, they should determine the TSLRR (in terms of CET1) as the
part of the additional own funds referred to in point b of paragraph 405405405, that is required
by the competent authority to be held in the form of CET1 capital.
407. Competent authorities should determine the OCR as the sum of:
a. TSCR; and
b. combined capital buffer requirements.

[Page 150]
150
408. Competent authorities should determine the OLRR as the sum of:
a. TSLRR; and
b. the G -SII leverage ratio buffer requirement in accordance with Article 92 (1a) of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
409. Competent authorities should not consider items and instruments other than those eligible
for the determination of own funds (as defined in Part Two of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013) in
the assessment/calculation of the TSCR, TSLRR, OCR or OLRR.
7.6 Articulation and justification of own funds requirements
410. Competent authorities should ensure there is consistency in setting additional own funds
requirements and communicating them to the institutions and/or, where relevant , other
competent authorities. As a minimum, this should involve communication of:
a. the institution’s TSCR as a proportion (ratio) of the TREA, broken down in terms of
the composition of the requirement; and
b. the institution’s TSLRR as a proportion (ratio) of the leverage ratio exposure (LRE),
broken down in terms of the composition of the requirement.
411. To communicate the TSCR as a ratio, competent authorities should express it using the
following formula:
𝑇𝑆𝐶𝑅 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 = 𝑇𝑆𝐶𝑅
𝑇𝑅𝐸𝐴
412. To communicate the TSLRR as a ratio, competent authorities should express it using the
following formula:
𝑇𝑆𝐿𝑅𝑅 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑖𝑜 = 𝑇𝑆𝐿𝑅𝑅
𝐿𝑅𝐸
413. To achieve further consistency, competent authorities should additionally communicate to
institutions and/or, where relevant, other competent authorities:
a. the OCR and its component parts – the Pillar 1 own funds requirements, additional
own funds requirements to address risks other than the risk of excessive leverage
and the buffer requirements – as a proportion (ratio) of the TREA, broken down in
terms of the composition of the requirement;

[Page 151]
151
b. the OLRR and its component parts – the leverage ratio own funds requirement,
additional own funds requirements to address the risk of excessive leverage and G-
SII leverage ratio buffer requirement – as a proportion (ratio) of the LRE, broken
down in terms of the composition of the requirement.
414. When communicating the prudential requirements to institutions, competent authorities
should justify their decisions to impose additional own funds requirements in accordance with
Article 104a(5) of Directive 2013/36/EU separately for the risk of excessive leverage and for
other types of risk s. The justification should be institution -specific and should provide a clear
indication of the main drivers underlying the additional own funds requirement, including the
risks and elements of risks contributing to additional own funds requirements.
415. In justifying additional own funds requirements competent authorities should refer to the
extent possible to the categories and subcategories/elements of risk as described in Title 6 and
Sections 7.2 and 7.3, taking into account the existing definitions of specific types of risks in the
applicable legislation, and they should aim at overall comparability across institutions.
416. In the justification of additional own funds requirements competent authorities should also
identify the main deficiencies to be covered by these requirements until they are addressed, in
line with paragraphs 386 and 387. Taking into consideration appropriate supervisory measures
in accordance with Title 10, competent authorities should request institutions to identify
appropriate actions to rectify these deficiencies and communicate expected timelines for
rectifying the deficiencies.
417. Competent authorities should communicate to institutions the appropriate minimum
composition of additional own funds requirements separately for the risk of excessive leverage
and for other types of risk. Where competent authorities use the derogation of the third
subparagraph of Article 104a(4) of Directive 2013/36/EU by requiring a higher quality of capital
than set out in the first and seco nd subparagraphs of that Article, they should provide clear
justification for that decision pointing out specific circumstances of the institution that lead to
the need for a higher quality of capital. In their justifications competent authorities should refer
to elements such as:
a. the specific nature of the institution, its shareholders and, where relevant, the
structure of the group, potentially affecting the possibility to raise capital
depending on the characteristics of certain capital instruments;
b. the specific nature of risk faced by the individual institution, potentially leading
to particularly rapid depletion of CET1 capital.
418. Competent authorities should communicate the final results of the SREP assessment to the
relevant resolution authorities. Competent authorities should provide the information on the

[Page 152]
152
additional own funds requirements that is requested by the resolution authorities for the
purpose of the estimation referred to in Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/111842.
419. Where considering the possibility of requiring a higher quality of capital competent
authorities should aim to avoid overlaps with other existing requirements within the relevant
TREA-based or leverage ratio-based stack of requirements and with MREL.
7.7 Meeting requirements in stressed conditions
420. Competent authorities should determine by means of stress testing the adequacy of the
institution’s own funds (quantity and composition) in stressed conditions and whether
supervisory measures, including P2G, P2G-LR, revised capital planning and other measures as
set out in Title 10 are necessary to address potential inadequacies.
421. To assess capital adequacy in stressed conditions, competent authorities should consider:
a. the use of the qualitative outcomes (e.g. deficiencies identified in risk management
and control) of institutions’ stress tests and supervisory stress testing; and
b. the use of the quantitative outcomes of institutions’ stress tests, if the ICAAP is
deemed reliable in accordance with paragraph 375, and of supervisory stress tests
(i.e. outcomes in terms of changes in own funds ratios), pursuant to Article 100 of
Directive 2013/36/EU as specified in Title 12 of these guidelines, and including, for
example:
i. prescribing specific ‘anchor’ scenarios/assumptions to be implemented by
institutions; and
ii. conducting system-wide stress tests using consistent methodologies and
scenarios run either by institutions or by supervisors.
422. Competent authorities should assess as appropriate the quantitative outcomes of stress
tests with regard to the adequacy and quality of the institution's own funds and determine
whether the quantity and quality of own funds are sufficient to cover applicab le capital
requirements, and in particular:
a. OCR including its combined buffer requirements under the baseline scenario over
a forward-looking time horizon of at least 2 years; and
42 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2021/1118 of 26 March 2021 supplementing Directive 2014/59/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards specifying the methodology to be
used by resolution authorities to estimate the requirement referred to in Article 104a of Directive 2013/36/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council and the combined buf fer requirement for resolution entities at the resolution
group consolidated level where the resolution group is not subject to those requirements under that Directive.

[Page 153]
153
b. TSCR under the adverse scenarios over a forward-looking time horizon of at least 2
years.
7.7.1 Using P2G to address the quantitative outcomes of stress testing
Determining and setting P2G and P2G-LR
423. Competent authorities should determine P2G and P2G-LR as specified in this section, and,
where the determination leads to a positive value, they should set P2G or P2G-LR to address
supervisory concerns about the sensitivity of the institution to the adverse scenarios used in
the supervisory stress tests.
424. P2G is the amount of capital that should be set to reach the overall level of own funds
considered appropriate under the SREP and the outcomes of supervisory stress tests. The level
of P2G should protect against the potential breach of TSCR in the adverse scenario The level of
P2G-LR should protect against the breach of TSLRR in the adverse scenario. Where the
quantitative outcomes of the supervisory stress tests suggest that the institution is not
expected to breach its TSCR under the adverse stress test scenario, competent authorities may
decide not to set P2G. Similarly, competent authorities may decide not to set P2G -LR where
TSLRR is not expected to be breached under the adverse stress test scenario.
425. Competent authorities should determine and set P2G and P2G-LR based on the outcomes
of the adverse scenario of the relevant supervisory stress tests , including the EU-wide stress
tests performed by the EBA or any other relevant supervisory stress tests performed on a
system-wide basis using a multi -factor scenario analysis over a forward -looking horizon of at
least 2 years (either top-down or bottom-up).
426. On the basis of establishing a proportionate approach for non -Category 1 institutions and
subsidiaries of cross -border groups, for setting and updating P2G and P2G -LR competent
authorities may consider the outcomes of simplified forms of supervisory stress tests (e.g.
through the use of supervisory prescribed ‘anchor’ scenarios, sensitivity analysis, top-down
stress tests conducted by designated authorities, p ortfolio level impacts from consolidated
level stress tests), past supervisory stress tests or institutions’ stress tests in accordance with
paragraph 421. The simpl ified forms of supervisory stress tests may be carried out on an
individual basis rather than as part of the system-wide exercise.
427. Competent authorities should determine and set P2G and P2G-LR in accordance with the
minimum engagement model specified in Section 2.2.4. In particular, the minimum frequency
with which P2G and P2G-LR are determined and set should be the frequency of the capital
adequacy assessment under the SREP minimum-engagement model. In particular, the
simplified forms of supervisory stress tests as referred to in paragraph 426426 are not expected
to have a greater frequency than the SREP, unless this is considered necess ary by the
competent authority.
428. Notwithstanding the previous paragraph, competent authorities:

[Page 154]
154
a. should assess whether the existing P2G and P2G -LR level is still appropriate
whenever the results of new supervisory stress tests are available , and revise the
level of P2G and P2G-LR if necessary;
b. may determine P2G and P2G -LR only every second year instead of annually,
including for institutions for which capital adequacy , according to the SREP
minimum engagement model, should be assessed annually (e.g. SREP Category 1
institutions). However, i n the year that follows the year of determining P2G ,
competent authorities should assess , on the basis of all relevant information,
including outcomes of past supervisory stress tests , together with additional
sensitivity analysis (i.e. simplified forms of supervisory stress testing), whether P2G
and P2G-LR are still relevant or need to be updated.
429. Competent authorities should generally not use P2G to cover aspects of risks that should
be covered by the additional own funds requirements in accordance with Section 7.2 of these
guidelines. Similarly, P2G-LR should not cover those aspects of risk of excessive leverage that
are covered by the additional own funds requirements in accordance with Section 7.3 of these
guidelines.
430. When determining the size of P2G, competent authoritie s should ensure that it is set at a
level appropriate to cover at least the anticipated maximum stress impact, wh ich should be
calculated based on the changes in the CET1 ratio (i.e. considering both movements in CET1
capital and TREA) in the worst year of stress and taking into account the level of applicable
capital requirements and the considerations set out in paragraphs 422422 and 432 to 436. The
maximum stress impact for the purpose of setting the P2G should be understood as the
difference between the lowest CET1 ratio in the adverse sce nario over the stress test horizon
and the actual CET1 ratio at the starting point. With regard to the determination of the size of
P2G-LR, the maximum stress impact should be calculated based on the changes in the Tier 1
capital in the worst year of stress and taking into account the applicable leverage ratio capital
requirements. The maximum stress impact for the purpose of setting the P2G -LR should be
understood as the difference between the lowest leverage ratio in the adverse scenario over
the stress test horizon and the actual leverage ratio at the starting point.
431. Competent authorities should obtain the P2G starting point specific for each institution by
offsetting elements that already cover risks reflected in the maximum stress impact. In
particular, competent authorities should offset the relevant measures, in particular capital
conservation buffer, as specified in paragraph 435435. In addition, when setting the P2G and
P2G-LR starting points , competent authorities may consider, where relevant, other
adjustments to the maximum stress impact related to the static balance sheet assumption or
the different time horizon between the stress test exercise and the time of the starting point.
432. Where setting the P2G and P2G-LR, competent authorities should ensure an adequate link
between the P2G and P2G -LR starting points and, respectively, the final P2G and P2G -LR. For
this purpose, they may decide to use a bucketing approach to classify institutions according to

[Page 155]
155
the P2G and P2G-LR starting points, based on the relevant supervisory stress tests set out in
paragraph 425 or based on other approaches set out in paragraph 426. Consequently,
competent authorities may assign a fixed range of respectively P2G or P2G -LR levels to each
bucket and set the final P2G and P2G -LR within the range of the assigned bucket or,
exceptionally, outside the range of the relevant bucket, based on the institution -specific
considerations. Competent authorities should aim to avoid cliff effects between buckets, for
instance by allowing partial overlap between the P2G or P2G-LR levels for neighbouring bucket,
and they should ensure that the resulting final P2G and P2G-LR are institution-specific.
433. When determining the final P2G and P2G -LR, competent au thorities should consider,
where relevant, the following factors:
a. the year when the maximum stress impact occurs in relation to the starting point
and time horizon of the scenarios used in the stress tests;
b. the outcome of a reliable institution stress test, taking into account the specific
scenario definitions and assumptions, in particular where they are deemed more
relevant for the business model and risk profile of the institution or where the
internal scenarios are more severe than the supervisory scenarios;
c. changes occurring after the cut-off date of the stress test exercise with a material
impact on the institutions’ risk profile or capital position (e.g. sale of non -
performing loans). These changes may include interim changes of the risk profile
including structural changes in the institutions’ activity or balance sheet;
d. relevant management mitigating actions of the institution that are deemed
credible and highly certain following their supervisory assessment;
e. information about and supervisory views o n the relevance of supervisory stress
testing to the institution’s strategy, financial plans and business model;
f. reduced certainty on the actual sensitivity of the institution to adverse scenarios;
g. any potential overlaps with the P2R or P2R-LR;
h. the institution’s overall recovery capacity as specified in Article 12(3) of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 43 , where the institution’s
calculation is considered sufficiently reliable and realistic;
i. the quality (composition) of the institution’s available own funds, including at the
worst year of stress; and
43 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2016/1075 of 23 March 2016 supplementing Directi ve 2014/59/EU of the
European Parliament and of the Council with regard to regulatory technical standards specifying the content of recovery
plans.

[Page 156]
156
j. whether or not the institution is under restructuring or resolution.
434. For the purpose of determining P2G in accordance with paragraph 433.b, competent
authorities should also consider the extent to which stress scenarios cover all the material risks
contributing to the additional own funds requirements in TSCR. Competent authorities should
in particular have regard to the fact that macroeconomic downturn scenarios may not entirely
capture some risks, for example conduct risk, pension risk or some elements of credit
concentration risk (e.g. single name concentration), that may amplify potential losses under the
tested adverse scenarios.
435. In addition, competent authorities should consider the extent to which the existing
combined buffer requirements and other applicable measures already cove r risks revealed by
stress testing. Competent authorities should offset P2G against the capital conservation buffer
(CCB), as P2G and the CCB overlap in nature. Furthermore, while no overlap is in principle
expected between P2G and the countercyclical capi tal buffer (CCyB), competent authorities
should, in exceptional cases, offset P2G on a case-by-case basis against the CCyB based on the
consideration of underlying risks covered by the buffer and factored into the design of the
scenarios used for the stress tests, after liaising with the macroprudential authority. Competent
authorities should not offset P2G against the systemi c risk buffers
(G-SII/O-SII buffers and the systemic risk buffer) , as those are intended to cover the risks an
institution poses to the financial system. Similarly, competent authorities should not offset
P2G-LR against the G -SII leverage ratio buffer req uirement specified in Article 92(1a) of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
436. Where competent authorities determine P2G, they should add this guidance on top of the
OCR. Where competent authorities determine P2G-LR, they should add this guidance on top of
OLRR. Com petent authorities should consider OCR and OLRR as two separate stacks of
requirements. Consequently, the available own funds can simultaneously be used to meet P2G
and P2G-LR.
Communication and composition of P2G and P2G-LR
437. When communicating P2G or P2G-LR to institutions, competent authorities should justify
their decisions. The justification should be institution -specific and should highlight the main
elements of the methodology used to determine P2G or P2G-LR.
438. Where P2G or P2G-LR is set or updated, competent authorities should communicate to the
institution their levels and the relevant time limits for its establishment in accordance with
paragraph 442442. Competent authorities should also explain the potential supervisory
reaction to situations where P2G or P2G-LR is not met.
439. Competent authorities should communicate to institutions that P2G should be met with
CET1 eligible own funds and P2G-LR should be met in Tier 1 eligible own funds. Both P2G and

[Page 157]
157
P2G-LR should be incorporated into their capital planning and risk management frameworks,
including the risk appetite framework and recovery planning.
440. Competent authorities should also communicate to institutions that own funds held for the
purposes of P2G cannot be used to meet any of the elements of OCR and that P2G -LR cannot
be used to meet any of the elements of OLRR.
441. Competent authorities should additionally communicate to institutions and where
relevant, other competent authorities, all applicable own funds ratios affected by P2G (CET1,
T1 and total own funds) and leverage ratio requirement affected by P2G-LR.
442. When setting and communicating to the institutions time limits to establish P2G or P2G-LR,
competent authorities should consider at least the following:
a. whether or not an institution is under the restructuring or resolution; and
b. the potential implication s that CET1 denominated P2G or P2G -LR may have for
other parts of the capital requirements and the ability of institutions to issue
additional Tier 1 (AT1) or Tier 2 (T2) instruments.
7.7.2 Capital planning and other supervisory measures to address capital adequacy in
stressed conditions
Capital planning
443. When the quantitative outcomes of the stress tests referred to in Section 7.7.1 indicate
that, under the given stress scenarios, an institution will not be able to meet the applicable
capital requirements, competent authorities should require the institution to submit a credible
capital plan that addresses the risk of not meeting its applicable capital requirements.
444. To determine the credibility of the capital plan, the competent authority should consider,
as appropriate:
a. whether the capital plan covers the entire assumed stress testing time horizon;
b. whether the capital plan puts forward a set of credible mitigating and management
actions, restricting dividend payments, etc.;
c. whether the institution is willing and able to take such act ions in order to address
the breaches of the applicable capital requirements in the system-wide stress tests;
d. whether those mitigating and management actions are subject to any legal or
reputational constraints, for instance due to contrary or conflicting former public
announcements (e.g. on dividend policies, business plans and risk appetite);

[Page 158]
158
e. the probability that mitigating and management action would enable the
institution to fully meet its applicable capital requirements within an appropriate
timeframe; and
f. whether the proposed actions are broadly in line with macroeconomic
considerations and with known future regulatory changes affecting an institution
within the scope and timeline of the assumed adverse scenarios;
g. the range of recovery options and the ir analysis as set out in the institution’s
recovery plan.
445. When assessing capital plans, the competent authority should, where appropriate,
following an effective dialogue with the institution, require the institution to make changes to
those plans as appr opriate, including to the proposed management actions, or require
institutions to take additional mitigating actions that would become relevant given the
scenarios and current macroeconomic conditions.
446. Competent authorities should expect institutions to implement the revised capital plan,
including further changes made based on the results of the supervisory assessment of and
dialogue with the institution.
Additional supervisory measures
447. Competent authorities should, where relevant, consid er the application of the additional
supervisory measures specified in Title 10, to ensure that the institution is adequately
capitalised in stressed conditions.
448. In particular, where the quantitative outcomes of the stress tests indicate that the
institution is likely to breach its applicable capital requirements under the adverse scenario
within the following 12 months, the competent authorities should, where appropriate, treat
such information as one of the possible circumstances within the meaning of Article 102(1)(b)
of Directive 2013/36/EU. In such cases , the competent authorities should apply appropriate
measures in accordance with Article 104(1) of Directive 2013/36/EU aimed at ensuring
sufficient levels of own funds. In particular, when such measures relate to capital, competent
authorities should in particular consider one or both of the following, as defined in Article
104(1)(a) and (f):
a. requiring institutions to hold an appropriate amount of additional own funds in the
form of a nominal amount, considering the outcome of the SREP assessment;
b. requiring a reduction in the inherent risk of an institution’s activities, products and
systems.
7.8 Summary of findings and scoring

[Page 159]
159
449. Following the above assessment, competent authorities should form a view on whether
existing own funds resources provide sound coverage of the risks to which the institution is or
might be exposed. This view should be reflected in a summary of findings, accomp anied by a
viability score based on the considerations specified in Table 8.
Table 8 - Supervisory considerations for assigning a score to capital adequacy
Score Supervisory view Considerations
1 The qua ntity and composition of
own funds held pose a low level of
risk to the viability of the institution.
• The institution is able to comfortably
meet its P2G and P2G LR.
• The institution holds a level of own funds
comfortably above its OCR and OLRR,
and is expected to do so in the future.
• Stress testing does not reveal any
discernible risk regarding the impact of a
severe but plausible economic downturn
on own funds or leverage.
• The free flow of capital between entities
in the group, where relevant, is not
impeded, or all entities are well
capitalised above supervisory
requirements.
• The institution has a plausible and
credible capital plan that has the
potential to be effective if required.
• There is no material/a very low risk of
excessive leverage.
2 The quantity and composition of
own funds held pose a medium-low
level of risk to the viability of the
institution.
• The institution has difficulty meeting its
P2G or P2G LR. Management mitigating
actions to address this are assessed as
credible.
• The institution is near to breaching some
of its capital buffers but is still clearly
above its TSCR and TSLRR.
• Stress testing reveals a low level of risk
regarding the impact of a severe but
plausible economic downturn on own
funds or leverage, but management
actions to address this seem credible.
• The free flow of capital between entities
in the group, where relevant, is or could
be marginally impeded.
• The institution has a plausible and
credible capital plan that, although not
without risk, has the potential to be
effective if required.
• There is a low level of risk of excessive
leverage.

[Page 160]
160
Score Supervisory view Considerations
3 The quantity and composition of
own funds held pose a medium-high
level of risk to the viability of the
institution.
• The institution does not meet its P2G or
P2G LR. There are concerns about the
credibility of management mitigating
actions to address this.
• The institution is using some of its capital
buffers. There is potential for the
institution to breach its TSCR or TSLRR if
the situation deteriorates.
• Stress testing reveals a medium level of
risk regarding the impact of a severe but
plausible economic d ownturn on own
funds or leverage. Management actions
may not credibly address this.
• The free flow of capital between entities
in the group, where relevant, is
impeded.
• The institution has a capital plan that is
unlikely to be effective.
• There is a medium level of risk of
excessive leverage.
4 The quantity and composition of
own funds held pose a high level of
risk to the viability of the institution.
• The institution does not meet its P2G or
P2G LR (or deliberately has not
established P2G or P2G LR) and will not
be able to do so in the foreseeable
future. Management mitigating actions
to address this are assessed as not
credible.
• The institution is near to breaching its
TSCR or TSLRR.
• Stress testing reveals that TSCR or TSLRR
would be brea ched near the beginning
of a severe but plausible economic
downturn. Management actions will not
credibly address this.
• The free flow of capital between entities
in the group, where relevant, is
impeded.
• The institution has no capital plan, or
one that is manifestly inadequate.
• There is a high level of risk of excessive
leverage.

[Page 161]
161
Assessing risks to liquidity and
funding
8.1 General considerations
450. Competent authorities should assess the risks to liquidity and funding that have been
identified as material for the institution. The purpose of this title is to provide common
methodologies to be considered when assessing individual risks and risk managem ent and
controls. It is not intended to be exhaustive and gives leeway to competent authorities to take
into account other additional criteria that may be deemed relevant based on their experience
and the specific features of the institution.
451. This title pr ovides competent authorities with a set of common elements for the
assessment of risks to liquidity and funding.
452. The methodology comprises three main components:
a. assessment of inherent liquidity risk;
b. assessment of inherent funding risk; and
c. assessment of liquidity and funding risk management.
453. In the assessment of risks to liquidity and funding, competent authorities should verify the
institution’s compliance with minimum EU regulatory requirements, the liquidity coverage ratio
(LCR), as specified in Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 44 and the net stable
funding ratio (NSFR), as established in Title IV of Part Six of the Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
However, these guidelines extend the scope of the assessment beyond those minimum
requirements, aiming to allow competent authorities to form a comprehensive view of the
risks.
454. This assessment flow is represented graphically in Figure 5.
44 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 of 10 October 2014 to supp lement Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of
the European Parliament and the Council with regard to liquidity coverage requirement for Credit Institutions.

[Page 162]
162
Figure 5. Elements of the assessment of risks to liquidity and funding
455. Following the criteria specified in this title, competent authorities should assess all three
components to form a view on the level of inherent liquidity and funding risk faced by the
institution, and on the quality of the institution’s liquidity and fund ing risk management and
controls. Given that liquidity risk and funding risk and their management are interconnected
and interdependent, the section for the assessment of liquidity and funding risk management
and controls is the same for both risks.
456. In con ducting the assessment of risks to liquidity and funding as part of the SREP,
competent authorities may use a combination of information sources, including:
a. outcomes from the analysis of the institution’s business model, particular ly those
that may help with understanding the key sources of risks to liquidity and funding;
b. information from the monitoring of key indicators;
c. supervisory reporting, and particularly the information provided by the institution
in its liquidity and funding risk reporting pursuant to Article 415 of Regulation (EU)
No 575/2013;
d. outcomes of the various supervisory activities;
e. information from AML/CFT competent authorities with a potential impact on
liquidity and funding position;
f. information provided by the institution, including information from the ILAAP;
g. findings and observations from internal or external audit reports;
Assessment of risks to
liquidity and funding
Assessment of
liquidity and
funding risk
management
Assessment of
inherent liquidity
risk(including
intraday)
Assessment of
inherent funding
risk
Liquidity risk
score
Funding risk
score
Liquidity risk
assessment
Funding risk
assessment
Liq/fund risk
management
assessment

[Page 163]
163
h. recommendations, guidelines and guidance included in LCR and NSFR
implementation reports issued by the EBA, as well as warnings and
recommendations issued by macroprudential authorities or the ESRB; and
i. risks identified in other institutions operating a similar business model (the p eer
group).
457. In their implementation of the methodologies and common elements specified in this title,
competent authorities should identify relevant quantitative indicators and other metrics, which
could be also used to monitor of key indicators as specified in Title 3.
458. The outcome of the assessment of each individual risk should be reflected in a summary of
findings that provides an explanation of the main risk drivers and a score , as explained in the
following sections.
8.2 Assessing liquidity risk
459. Competent authorities should assess the institution’s short- and medium-term liquidity risk
over an appropriate set of time horizons, including intraday periods, to ensure that the
institution maintain s adequate levels of liquidity buffers, under both normal and stressed
conditions. This assessment includes the following elements:
a. evaluation of liquidity needs in the short and medium term;
b. evaluation of intraday liquidity risk;
c. evaluation of liquidity buffer and counterbalancing capacity; and
d. supervisory liquidity stress testing.
460. For the assessment of liquidity needs, buffers and counterbalancing capacity under normal
conditions, competent authorities should support the analysis with evidence from the reporting
templates for additional monito ring metrics as specified and introduced in the ITS on
supervisory reporting45. Competent authorities may perform less granular intraday liquidity risk
evaluation and liquidity stress testing , where this is justified by lower materiality of these
sources of risk, especially for Category 3 and Category 4 institutions.
Evaluation of liquidity needs in the short and medium term
461. Competent authorities should assess the institution’s liquidity needs in the short and
medium ter m under both normal and stressed conditions (shocks). They should take into
account:
45 Commission Implementing Regulation (EU) 2021/451.

[Page 164]
164
a. the institution’s stressed liquidity needs at different times, in particular before 30
days, between 30 days and 3 months, and after 3 to 12 months, and specifically the
effect on the institution’s liquidity needs (net cash outflows) of severe but plausible
stresses, to cover idiosyncratic, market-wide and combined shocks; and
b. the size, location and currency of the liquidity needs and, where an institution
operates in diffe rent material currencies, the separate impacts of shocks in the
different currencies, to reflect currency convertibility risk.
462. Competent authorities should support the assessment of short -term liquidity risk by
analysing, as a minimum, the LCR as specified in Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)
2015/61, and in particular:
a. whether the institution is correctly reporting its LCR position; and
b. whether the LCR adequately identifies the institution’s liquidity needs.
463. In evaluating the impact of shocks on the institution’s liquidity needs, competent
authorities should take into account all material sources of liquidity risk for the institution. In
particular, they should take into account, as relevant:
a. the possibility that any applicable EU regulatory requirement would not adequately
identify the institution’s liquidity needs in the event of the type of stress scenario
used for the requirement, including where maturities are shorter than 30 days.
b. risks arising in respec t of wholesale counterparties regarding on -balance-sheet
items and funding concentrations, and taking into account actions the institution
may take to preserve its reputation/franchise;
c. risks arising in respect of contingent cash flows/off -balance-sheet it ems (for
example, credit lines, margin calls) and activities (for example, liquidity support for
unconsolidated special -purpose vehicles beyond contractual obligations), taking
into account actions the institution may take to preserve its reputation/franchise;
d. inflows and outflows on a gross basis as well as a net basis: where there are very
high inflows and outflows, competent authorities should pay specific attention to
the risk to the institution when inflows are not received when expected, even when
the net outflow risk is limited;
e. risks arising in respect of retail counterparties, taking into account actions the
institution may take to preserve its reputation/franchise. For this purpose,
competent authorities should make use of the methodology on the cl assification
of retail deposits into different risk buckets, pursuant to Articles 24 and 25 of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 ;

[Page 165]
165
f. the risk that excessive risks in the medium - to long -term funding profile will
adversely affect the behaviour of c ounterparties relevant to the short -term
liquidity position; and
g. risk arising in the context of fiduciary deposits46.
Evaluation of intraday liquidity risk
464. Competent authorities should assess the institution’s exposure to intraday liquidity risk for
a selected time horizon, including the intraday availability of liquid assets given the
unpredictable nature of unexpected intraday outflows or lack of inflows. Competent authorities
may take into account potentially lower materiality of this source of risk, especially for Category
3 and Category 4 institutions. For all other institutions, where this source of risk is considered
material, this assessment should include, as a minimum, an evaluation of intraday liquidity
available or accessible under normal conditions as well as under financial or operational stress
(e.g. IT failures, legal constraints on the transfer of funds, suspension/termination of access to
correspondent banking services and/or clearing services for currencies, commodities or
instruments significant for the institution).
465. For those jurisdictions where reporting on intraday risk is not yet available, competent
authorities should rely on the institution’s own analysis of intraday liquidity risk.
Evaluation of liquidity buffer and counterbalancing capacity
466. Competent authorities should assess the adequacy of the institution’s liquidity buffer and
counterbalancing capacity to meet its liquidity needs within a month as well as over different
time horizons, potentially up to 1 year, including overnight. This assessment should take into
account:
a. the directly available liquidity buffers or the institution’s survival period s under
different stress scenarios;
b. the overall counterbalancing capacity available to the institution over the full
period of the relevant stress scenario;
c. the characteristics, such as severity and duration, of different stress scenarios and
periods considered in the evaluation of the institution’s liquidity needs;
d. the amount of assets that would need to be liquidated over t he relevant time
horizons;
46 The best practices are available in the EBA report: Monitoring of liquidity coverage ra tio implementation in the EU –
Second report (EBA/REP/2021/07).

[Page 166]
166
e. whether the actual liquidity buffer and counterbalancing capacity , including the
quality of liquid assets, are in line with the institution’s liquidity risk appetite; and
f. the classification and quality of liquid assets, as specified in Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2015/61 (LCR Delegated Regulation)47.
467. Competent authorities should assess the institution’s ability to monetise its liquid assets in
a timely fashion to meet its liquidity needs during a stress peri od. They should take into
account:
a. whether the institution tests its market access by selling or repo -ing on a periodic
basis;
b. whether there are high concentrations that may represent a risk of overestimation
of the liquidity buffer and counterbalancing capacity;
c. whether the assets in the buffer are unencumbered (as defined in the EBA
Guidelines on disclosure of encumbered and unencumbered assets 48), under the
control of the relevant staff and readily available to a liquidity management
function;
d. whether the denomination of the liquid assets is consistent with the distribution of
liquidity needs by currency;
e. where the institution has borrowed liquid assets, whether it has to return them
during a short-term liquidity stress period, which would mean that the institution
would no longer have them available to meet its stressed outflows considering the
net effect of the transaction; and
f. the likely value of committed liquidity facilities, where competent authorities
determine that such facilities can to some extent be included in the
counterbalancing capacity.
Supervisory liquidity stress testing
468. Competent authorities should use liquidity stress tests, defined and run by the competent
authorities, as an independent tool to assess short- and medium-term liquidity risks, to:
a. identify liquidity risks over different time horizons and in various stress scenarios.
Stress scenarios should be anchored to the 30 -day LCR stress assumptions, but
competent authorities may extend the scope of their assessment by exploring risks
47 Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 of 10 October 2014 to supplement Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 of
the European Parliament and the Council with regard to liquidity coverage require ment for Credit Institutions (OJ L 11,
17.1.2015, p. 1–36).
48 EBA Guidelines on disclosure of encumbered and unencumbered assets (EBA/GL/2014/03)

[Page 167]
167
within 30 days as well as beyond 30 days, and altering the LCR assumptions to
reflect risks not adequately covered in the LCR;
b. inform their own view of liquidity risks in addition to the information from the
institution’s internal stress tests;
c. identify and quantify specific areas of liquidity risk; and
d. inform their view on the overall liquidity risk to which the institution is exposed,
which will enable them to compare the relative risk of institutions. As a minimum,
this should include a supervisory stress test combining institution -specific and
market-wide stress.
469. Competent authorities may assess the possibl e change in and sensitivity of the liquidity
coverage requirement following the application of Articles 412(3) and 414 of Regulation
(EU) No 575/2013 during mild stress scenarios, by means of supervisory or institution liquidity-
specific stress testing. The scenarios applied for this assessment should typically be less severe
(e.g. only market -wide stress) than the scenarios used to test the survival of the institution
(market-wide and systemic stress) and consequently reflect situations in which institutio ns
would not be expected to use their minimum liquidity buffer . When performing supervisory
liquidity stress testing for Category 3 and Category 4 institutions, competent authorities may
use fewer scenarios and apply lower granularity of the analysis than for other institutions.
8.3 Assessing inherent funding risk
470. Competent authorities should assess the institution’s funding risk and whether the
medium- and long-term assets and off-balance-sheet items are adequately met with a range of
stable funding instruments under both normal and stressed conditions. This assessment
includes the following elements:
a. evaluation of the institution’s funding profile;
b. evaluation of risks to the stability of the funding profile;
c. evaluation of actual market access; and
d. evaluation of expected change in funding risks based on the institution’s funding
plan.
Evaluation of the institution’s funding profile
471. Competent authorities should assess the appropriateness of the institution’s funding
profile, including both medi um- and long -term contractual and behavioural mismatches, in
relation to its business model, strategy and risk appetite. More specifically, they should take
into account:

[Page 168]
168
a. whether the institution’s medium - and long -term assets and off -balance-sheet
items are adequately met with a range of stable funding instruments, pursuant to
Article 413 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, and whether its actual mismatches
over the relevant time horizons are within acceptable boundaries in relation to the
specific business model of the institution;
b. whether – in light of the competent authorit y’s view on the institution’s desired
funding profile – the institution’s actual funding profile falls short of its desired
profile;
c. (local) regulatory and contractual factors affecting the behavioural characteristics
of funding providers (e.g. regulations regarding clearing, bail-in, deposit guarantee
schemes, etc., as they may influence the behaviour of funding providers),
particularly when there are material changes or differ ences between jurisdictions
in which the institution operates; and
d. that maturity transformation will lead to a certain level of mismatches but that
these must remain within manageable and controllable boundaries to prevent
collapse of the business model du ring stress periods or changes in market
circumstances.
e. where available, any supplementary information received from the AML/CFT
supervisor on the exposure to ML/TF risks and the potential deficiencies of the
ML/TF risk management system of the institution that could increase funding risk.
472. Competent authorities should support the assessment of the institution’s funding profile
by analysing, as a minimum, the NSFR as specified in Title IV of Part Six of Regulation
(EU) No 575/2013, and in particular:
a. whether the institution is correctly reporting its NSFR position; and
b. whether the NSFR adequately identifies the institution’s stable funding needs.
473. Competent authorities should assess whether potential shortcomings arising from the
institution’s funding profile, such as maturity mismatches breaching acceptable boundaries,
excessive concentrations o f funding sources, excessive level s of asset encumbrance or
inappropriate or unstable funding of long-term assets, could lead to an unacceptable increase
in the cost of funding for the institution. They should take into account:
a. the risk of funding being rolled over at higher interest rates where there is an
excessive dependence on specific sources of funding, the funding needs of the
institution soar or the sources of funding perceive the institution as having a riskier
profile, especially when it is not likely that those higher costs will be transferred
automatically to clients; and

[Page 169]
169
b. whether an increasing level of asset encumbrance above acceptable limits reduces
access to and increases the price of unsecured funding.
Evaluation of risks to the stability of the funding profile
474. Competent authorities should consider factors that may reduce the stability of the funding
profile in relation to the type and characteristics of assets, off -balance-sheet items and
liabilities. They should take into account:
a. the possibility that any applicable EU regulatory requirement would not adequately
identify the stability of the institution’s funding profile under normal or stress
scenarios, including longer than 1-year time horizons;
b. the fact that some specific asset classes will be more significant than others to the
institution and/or the system;
c. the structural maturity mismatch between assets and liabilities in different
significant currencies, where applicable, as well as in aggregate, and how currency
mismatches overlaying structural maturity mismatches affects the overall risk to
the stability of the funding profile; and
d. appropriate structural funding metrics (appropriate to the institution’s business
model). Examples of structural fu nding metrics may include loan/deposit ratio,
customer funding gap and behaviourally adjusted maturity ladder;
e. funding characteristics that could indicate increased ML/TF risks and concerns from
a prudential perspective (such as dependence on non-resident deposits especially
from high-risk jurisdictions (as identified by the European Commission), deposits
with foreign booking locations not consistent with the business model, or unusual
interest rate settings compared to peers that are not consistent with the product
type or institution’s business model) . Where such characteristics are identified,
competent authorities should liaise with the AML/CFT supervisor to obtain their
assessment on the ML/TF risk management system and determine the impact on
the funding risk49.
475. Competent authorities should assess risks to the sustainability of the funding profile arising
from concentrations in funding sources. They should take into account the following factors, as
relevant:
a. concentrations in different respects, notably and where applicable: the type of
funding instruments used, specific funding markets, single or connected
counterparties and other concentration risks that may affect access to funding in
the future (focusing on the markets and instruments relevant to the long -term
49 In accordance with the EBA AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines (EBA/GL/2021/15).

[Page 170]
170
funding profile and noting that their view on concentration risk in the short -term
liquidity profile may be relevant); and
b. the risk that asset encumbrance may have an adverse effect on the market ’s
appetite for the unsecured debt of the institution (in the context of the specific
characteristics of the market(s) in which the institution operates and the
institution’s business model). Factors for this assessment may include:
• the total amount of encumbere d and/or borrowed assets compared with
the balance sheet;
• the availability of free assets (assets that are unencumbered but that may
be encumbered), especially when considered in relation to total unsecured
wholesale funding;
• the level of overcollateralisa tion relative to the capital base;
overcollateralisation refers to the extent to which the value of the assets
used to obtain secured funding exceeds the notional amount of funding
obtained (e.g. if EUR 120 of assets are used for EUR 100 of secured funding,
the overcollateralisation is 20); and
• the implications of the level of overcollateralisation for the deposit
insurance scheme if the institution fails.
Evaluation of actual market access
476. Competent authorities should be aware of the institution’s actual m arket access and
current and future threats to this market access. They should take into account the following
factors, as relevant
a. any information of which they are aware, including information from the institution
itself, indicating that the institution makes high demands on particular markets or
counterparties (including central banks) that are important to it, relative to those
markets’/counterparties’ capacity;
b. any significant or unexpected changes in the issuance of debt of which competent
authorities become aware in each significant market (including in significant
currencies); note that competent authorities would expect institutions to alert
them to any such changes. They should also assess whether any such changes are
due to the strategic choices of the institution or whether they are signs of reduced
market access;
c. the risk that news about the institution may negatively influence the market
(perception/confidence) and therefore market access. Such news may or may not
yet be known to the market; and

[Page 171]
171
d. signs that short-term liquidity risks (e.g. when short-term liquidity risk is assessed
as high) may reduce the access the institution has to its major funding markets.
Evaluation of expected change in funding risks based on the institution’s funding plan
477. Competent authorities should assess the expected change in funding risks based on the
institution’s funding plan. This assessment should take into account the following aspects:
a. the way the institution’s funding plan, when executed in full, will affect the
institution’s funding risks, bearing in mind that the execution of the funding plan
may increase or decrease the risks in the funding profile; and
b. the supervisory view of the feasibility of the plan.
8.4 Assessing liquidity and funding risk management
478. To achieve a comprehensive understanding of the institution’s liquidity and funding risk
profile, competent authorities should also review the governance and risk management
framework underlying its liquidity and funding risk. To this end, competent authorities shou ld
assess:
a. the liquidity risk strategy and liquidity risk appetite;
b. the organisational framework, policies and procedures;
c. risk identification, measurement, management, monitoring and reporting;
d. the institution’s liquidity-specific stress testing;
e. the internal control framework for liquidity risk management;
f. the institution’s liquidity contingency plans; and
g. the institution’s funding plans.
Liquidity risk strategy and liquidity risk appetite
479. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution app ropriately defines and
communicates its liquidity risk strategy and liquidity risk appetite. They should take into
account:
a. whether the liquidity risk strategy and liquidity risk appetite are established,
approved and updated by the management body;
b. whether the institution has an appropriate framework in place to ensure that the
liquidity risk strategy is effectively communicated to relevant staff;

[Page 172]
172
c. whether the liquidity risk strategy and appetite are clearly defined, properly
documented, effectively implemented and communicated to all relevant staff;
d. whether the liquidity risk appetite is appropriate for the institution considering its
business model, overall risk tolerance, role in the financial system, financial
condition and funding capacity; and
e. whether the institution’s liquidity risk strategy and appetite framework is properly
integrated within its overall risk appetite framework.
Organisational framework, policies and procedures
480. Competent a uthorities should assess whether the institution has appropriate
arrangements for the governance and management of liquidity and funding risk. For this
assessment, competent authorities should take into account:
a. whether the management body approves the go vernance and policies for
managing liquidity and funding risk and discusses and reviews them regularly;
b. whether senior management is responsible for developing and implementing the
policies and procedures for managing liquidity and funding risk;
c. whether senior management ensures that the decisions of the management body
are monitored;
d. whether the liquidity and funding risk management framework is internally
coherent and ensures ILAAP is comprehensive , and is well integrated into the
institution’s wider risk management process;
e. whether the policies and procedures are appropriate for the institution, taking into
account its liquidity risk appetite; and
f. whether the policies and procedures are properly defined, formalised and
effectively communicated throughout the institution.
481. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate
organisational framework for liquidity and funding risk management, measurement and control
functions, with sufficient human and technical resources to develop and implement these
functions and to carry out the required monitoring tasks. They should take into account:
a. whether the liquidity risk control and monitoring systems and processes are
controlled by independent control functions;
b. whether the risk management, measurement and control functions cover liquidity
risk in the entire institution (including branches), and in particular all areas where
liquidity risk can be taken, mitigated or monitored;

[Page 173]
173
c. whether the institution has a set of liquidity and funding policy documents that are
adequate for promoting prudent behaviour by the institution’s staff (including with
regard to deposit taking) and allowing for efficient operation of the control
functions; and
d. whether the institution has appropriate internal written policies and procedures
for the management of liquidity and funding risk, as well as the adequacy of the
institution’s liquidity and funding risk management framework.
482. Competent authorities should assess the adequacy of the institution’s approach to
maintaining market access in its significant funding markets. They should take into account:
a. the institution’s approach to maintaining an ongoing presence in the markets
(testing market access ); for specific small institutions or specialised business
models, testing of access to markets may not be relevant;
b. the institution’s approach to developing strong relationships with fund ing
providers to lower the risk of its access being reduced; and
c. any evidence that the institution would continue to have ongoing market access in
times of stress (even though it may be more expensive for the institution to do so
at such times).
Risk identification, measurement, management, monitoring and reporting
483. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an appropriate
framework and IT systems for identifying and measuring liquidity and funding risk, in line with
the institution’s size, complexity, risk appetite and risk-taking capacity. They should take the
following factors into account:
a. whether the instit ution has implemented appropriate methods for projecting its
cash flows over an appropriate set of time horizons, assuming business -as-usual
and stress situations, and comprehensively across material risk drivers;
b. whether the institution uses appropriate k ey assumptions and methodologies,
which are regularly reviewed , recogni sing interaction between different risks
(credit, market, etc.) arising from both on- and off-balance sheet items;
c. when relevant, whether all material legal entities, branches and subsidiaries in the
jurisdiction in which the institution is active are included; and
d. whether the institution understands its ability to access financial instruments
wherever they are held, having regard to any legal, regulatory and operating
restrictions on their use, including, for example, the inaccessibility of assets due to
encumbrance during different time horizons.

[Page 174]
174
484. Competent authorities should assess whether institutions have an appropriate reporting
framework for liquidity and funding risk. They should take into account:
a. whether there is a set of reporting criteria agreed by senior management,
specifying the scope, manner and frequency of liquidity and funding risk reporting
and who is responsible for preparing the reports;
b. the quality and appropriateness of information systems, management information
and internal information flow s supporting liquidity and funding risk management
and whether the data and information used by the institution are understandable
for the target audience, accurate and usable ( e.g. timely, not overly complex,
within the correct scope, etc.); and
c. whether specific reports and documentation containing comprehensive and easily
accessible information on liquidity risk are submitted regularly to the appropriate
recipients (such as the management body, senior management or an asset-liability
committee).
485. Competent authorities should assess the adequacy of the process of measuring intraday
liquidity risk, especially for those institutions that participate in payment, settlement an d
clearing systems. They should take into account:
a. whether the institution adequately monitors and controls cash flows and liquid
resources available to meet intraday requirements and forecasts when cash flows
will occur during the day; and
b. whether the ins titution carries out adequate specific stress testing for intraday
operations (where the institution should consider similar scenarios to those
specified above).
486. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has an adequate set of
indicators regarding the liquidity and funding position that are appropriate to the business
model and the nature, scale and complexity of the institution. They should take into account:
a. whether the indicators adequately reflect the institution’s liquidity risk profile, such
as:
• the degree of diversification of liquid assets in the liquidity buffer between
the various categories of liquid assets and within the same category of
liquid assets and any other relevant diversification factors, such as types of
issuers, counterparties or the geographical location of those issuers and
counterparties;
• the degree of consistency between the currency denomination of their
liquid assets and the distribution by currency of their net liquidity outflows;

[Page 175]
175
b. whether the indicators adequa tely cover key liquidity risk aspects related to
potential cliff risks linked to, among others:
• the concentration of outflows maturities, considering also any potential
early withdrawal of liabilities, particularly in the short and medium term;
• the central bank support programmes;
c. whether the indicators adequately cover the institution’s key structural funding
vulnerabilities, covering the following aspects, where appropriate:
• the degree of dependence on a single market or an excessively small
number of markets/counterparties;
• the ‘stickiness’ of funding sources and factors driving behaviour;
• the concentration of activities in different currencies, namely the degree
of consistency between the currency denomination of the available stable
funding and the distribution by currency of the required stable funding;
• the concentration of funding from specific lenders, including central banks,
in the short, medium and long term;
• major concentrations of maturities and maturity gaps over the longer
term; and
d. whether the indicators are adequately documented, periodically r evised, used as
inputs to define the risk appetite of the institution, part of management reporting
and used for setting operating limits.
Institution’s liquidity-specific stress testing
487. Competent authorities should assess whether an institution has implemented adequate
liquidity-specific stress testing as part of its overall stress testing programme, in accordance
with the EBA Guidelines on institutions’ stress testing, to understand the impact of adverse
events on its risk exposure and on the quantitative and qualitative adequacy of its liquid assets,
and to determine whether the institution’s liquidity holdings are sufficient to cover risks that
may crystallise during different types of stress scenarios and/or to address risks posed by
control, governance or other deficiencies. For this purpose, competent authorities should take
into account whether the institution’s stress testing framework is appropriate for:
a. determining the institution’s survival horizon given its existing liquidity buffer and
stable sources of funding , and taking into account the institution’s risk appetite,
during a severe but plausible liquidity stress period;

[Page 176]
176
b. analysing the impact of stress scenarios on its consolid ated group-wide liquidity
position and on the liquidity position of individual entities and business lines; and
c. understanding where risks could arise, regardless of its organisational structure
and the degree of centralised liquidity risk management.
488. Competent authorities should also assess whether additional tests are needed for
individual entities and/or liquidity subgroups that are exposed to significant liquidity risks.
These tests should take into account the consequences of the scenarios over different time
horizons, including on an intraday basis.
489. Competent authorities should ensure that the institution provides the modelled impact of
different types of stress scenarios , as well as a number of sensitivity tests (on the basis of
proportionality). Careful consideration should be given to the assessment of the design of stress
scenarios and the variety of shocks simul ated in them, taking into account whether , in this
design, the institution not only considers the past, but also makes use of hypotheses based on
expert judgement. Competent authorities should analyse whether the following scenarios are
considered as a minimum:
a. short-term and prolonged;
b. institution-specific and market -wide (occurring simultaneously in a variety of
markets); and
c. a combination of (i) and (ii).
490. An important aspect that competent authorities should consider when assessing the
institution’s stress testing framework is the modelling of the impact of the hypothetical stress
scenario(s) on the institution’s cash flows and on its counterbalancing capacity and survival
horizon, and whether the modelling reflects the different impacts that economic st ress may
have on both an institution’s assets and its in- and outflows.
491. Competent authorities should also assess whether the institution takes a conservative
approach to setting stress testing assumptions. Depending on the type and severity of the
scenario, competent authorities should consider, as relevant, the appropriateness of a number
of assumptions, in particular:
a. the run-off of retail funding;
b. the reduction of secured and unsecured wholesale funding;
c. the correlation between funding markets and diver sification across different
markets;
d. additional contingent off-balance sheet exposures;

[Page 177]
177
e. funding tenors (e.g. where the funding provider has call options);
f. the impact of any deterioration of the institution’s credit rating;
g. FX convertibility and access to foreign exchange markets and correspondent
banking accounts;
h. the ability to transfer liquidity across entities, sectors and countries;
i. estimates of future balance-sheet growth; and
j. due to reputational risks, an implicit requirement for the institution to roll over
assets and to extend or maintain other forms of liquidity support.
492. Competent authorities should assess whether the management framework of the
institution’s liquidity-specific stress testing is appropriate and whether it is properly integrated
into the overall risk management strategy. They should take into account:
a. whether the extent and frequency of stress tests are appropriate to the nature and
complexity of the institution, its liquidity risk exposures and its relative importance
in the financial system;
b. whether the outcomes of stress testing are integrated into the institution’s
strategic planning process for liquidity and funding and used to increase the
effectiveness of liquidity management in the event of a crisis, including in the
institution’s liquidity contingency and recovery plan;
c. whether the institution has an adequate process for identifying suitable risk factors
for conducting st ress tests, having regard to all material vulnerabilities that can
undermine the liquidity position of the particular institution;
d. whether assumptions and scenarios are reviewed and updated sufficiently
frequently; and
e. where the liquidity management of a g roup is being assessed, whether the
institution pays adequate attention to any potential obstacles to the transfer of
liquidity within the group.
Liquidity risk internal control framework
493. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has a st rong and
comprehensive internal limit and control framework and sound safeguards to mitigate or limit
its liquidity risk in line with its risk appetite. They should take into account whether:
a. the limit and control framework is adequate for the institution’ s complexity, size
and business model and reflects the different material drivers of liquidity risk, such

[Page 178]
178
as maturity mismatches, currency mismatches, derivatives transactions, collateral
management, off-balance-sheet items and intraday liquidity risk;
b. the institution has limits in place to ensure consistency between the currency
denomination of their liquid assets and the distribution by currency of their net
liquidity outflows in accordance with Article 8(6) of Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2015/61;
c. the institution has implemented adequate limits and monitoring systems that are
consistent with its liquidity risk appetite and that make use of the outcomes of
liquidity stress tests;
d. the risk limits are regularly reviewed by the competent bodies of the institution
and clearly communicated to all relevant business lines;
e. there are clear and transparent procedures regarding how individual liquidity risk
limits are approved and reviewed;
f. there are clear and transparent procedures regarding how compliance w ith
individual liquidity risk limits are monitored and how limit breaches are handled
(including clear escalation and reporting procedures); and
g. the limit and control framework helps the institution to ensure the availability of a
diversified funding structure and sufficient and accessible liquid assets.
494. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has implemented an
adequate transfer pricing system as part of the liquidity risk control framework. They should
take into account:
a. whether the institution’s transfer pricing system covers all material business
activities;
b. whether the institution’s funds transfer pricing system incorporates all relevant
liquidity costs, benefits and risks;
c. whether the resulting mechanism allows manageme nt to give appropriate
incentives for managing liquidity risk;
d. whether the transfer pricing methodology and its calibration are reviewed and
updated appropriately given the size and complexity of the institution;
e. whether the transfer pricing system and its methodology are communicated to the
relevant staff; and
f. as an additional factor, whether the institution’s policy on incorporating the funds
transfer pricing (FTP) methodology into the internal pricing framework is used for

[Page 179]
179
assessing and deciding on transactions with customers (this includes both sides of
the balance sheet, e.g. granting loans and taking deposits).
495. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution has adequate controls
regarding the liquid-assets buffer. They should take into account whether:
a. the control framework covers the timely monitoring of the liquid -assets buffer,
including the quality of the assets, immediate availability to the group entity using
the assets to cover liquidity risks and any impediments to their timely con version
into cash;
b. the institution has concentration limits in place between the various categories of
liquid assets and within the same category of liquid assets in the liquidity buffer (by
counterparty, type of issuer or the geographical location of tho se issuers and
counterparties) in accordance with Article 8(1) of Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2015/61; and
c. the institution has an appropriate policy on monitoring market conditions that can
affect its ability to sell or repo assets quickly in the market.
Liquidity contingency plans
496. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution’s liquidity contingency plan
(LCP) adequately specifies the policies, procedures and action plans for responding to severe
potential disruptions to the institution’s ability to fund itself. They should take into account the
content and scope of contingency funding measures included in the LCP, and in particular
factors such as:
a. whether the LCP adequately explains governance arrangements for its activation
and maintenance.
b. whether the LCP appropriately reflects the institution’s liquidity-specific and wider
risk profile.
c. whether the institution has a framework of liquidity early warning indicators,
including among others those established as liquidity indicators in the EBA GL on
recovery plan indicators that are likely to be effective in enabling the institution to
identify deteriorating market circumstances in a timely manner and to determine
quickly what actions need to be taken.
d. whether the LCP describes clearly that the LCR liquidity buffer is designed to be
used in case of stress, even if that leads to LCR values below 100%, including that
it is part of the expected management of liquidity risk under stress that subsequent
communications to senior management take place if established lower LCR values
are reached. The LCP should clearly reflect and describe how liquidity risk should

[Page 180]
180
be managed under stress to steer towards targeted LCR levels as closely as
possible.
e. whether the LCP clearly articulates all material (potential) funding sources,
including the estimated amounts available for the different sources of liquidity and
the estimated time needed to obtain funds from them.
f. whether the measures are in line with the institution’s overall risk strategy and
liquidity risk appetite.
g. the appropriateness of the assumptions regarding the role of central bank funding
in the institution’s LCP. Examples of factors competent authorities may consider
could include the institution’s views on:
• the current and future availability of potential alternative funding sources
connected to central bank lending programmes;
• the types of lending facilities, the acceptable collateral and the operational
procedures for accessing central bank funds; and
• the circumstances under which central bank funding would be needed, the
amount required and the period for w hich such a use of central bank
funding would probably be required.
497. Competent authorities should assess whether the actions described in the LCP are feasible
in relation to the stress scenarios in which they are meant to be taken. They should take into
account factors such as:
a. the level of consistency and interaction between the institution’s liquidity -related
stress tests, its LCP and its liquidity early warning indicators;
b. whether the actions defined in the LCP appear likely to enable the institution to
react adequately to a range of possible scenarios of severe liquidity stress,
including institution -specific and market -wide stress, as well as the potential
interaction between them; and
c. whether the actions defined in the LCP are prudently quantified in te rms of
liquidity-generating capacity under stressed conditions and the time required to
execute them, taking into account operational requirements such as pledging
collateral at a central bank.
498. Competent authorities should assess the appropriateness of the institution’s governance
framework with respect to its LCP. They should take into account factors such as:

[Page 181]
181
a. the appropriateness of escalation and prioritisation procedures detailing when and
how each of the actions can and should be activated;
b. whether the institution has adequate policies and procedures with respect to
communication within the institution and with external parties; and
c. the degree of consistency between the LCP and the institution’s business continuity
plans.
Funding plans
499. Competent authorities should assess whether the funding plan is feasible and appropriate
in relation to the nature, scale and complexity of the institution, its current and projected
activities and its liquidity and funding profile. They should take into account factors such as:
a. whether the funding plan is robust in terms of its ability to support the projected
business activities under adverse scenarios;
b. the expected change in the institution’s funding profile arising from the execution
of the funding plan and whether this is suitable given the institution’s activities and
business model;
c. whether the funding plan supports any required or desired improvements in the
institution’s funding profile;
d. their own view on the (changes in) market activity planned by institutions in their
jurisdiction on an aggregated level, and what that means for the feasibility of
individual funding plans;
e. whether the funding plan is:
• integrated with the overall strategic plan of the institution;
• consistent with its business model; and
• consistent with its liquidity risk appetite;
500. In addition, competent authorities may consider:
a. whether the institution adequately analyses and is aware of the appropriateness
and adequacy of the funding plan given the institution’s current liquidity and
funding positions and their projected development. As part of this, competent
authorities may consider whether the institution’s senior management can explain
why the funding plan is feasible and where its weaknesses lie;

[Page 182]
182
b. the institution’s policy for determining what funding dimensions and what markets
are significant to the institution (and whether it is adequate);
c. the time horizon envisaged by the institution for migration to a different funding
profile, if required or desired, bearing in mind that there may be risks involved if
migration towards the end state is either too fast or too slow; and
d. whether the funding plan contains different strategies and clear management
procedures for timely implementation of strategy changes.
501. Competent authorities should assess whether the institution’s funding plan is appropriately
implemented. As a minimum, they should take into account:
a. whether the funding plan is properly documented and communicated to all the
relevant staff; and
b. whether the funding plan is embedded in the day -to-day operations of the
institution, especially in the funding decision-making process.
502. In addition, competent authorities may take into account whether the institution is able to
reconcile the funding plan with the data provided to competent authorities in the funding plan
template.
503. Competent authorities should consi der the quality of the institution’s processes for
monitoring the execution of the funding plan and its ability to react to deviations in a timely
manner. For this assessment, competent authorities should take into account factors such as:
a. the quality of the updates to (senior) management regarding the current status of
the execution of the funding plan;
b. whether the funding plan envisages alternative fall-back measures to be
implemented if there are changes in the market conditions; and
c. the policy and practice of the institution regarding the regular review and updating
of the funding plan when the actual funding raised significantly differs from the
funding plan.
8.5 Summary of findings and scoring
504. Following the above assessment, competent authorities shoul d form a view on the
institution’s funding and liquidity risks. This view should be reflected in a summary of findings,
accompanied by a risk score based on the considerations specified in Tables 9 and 10.

[Page 183]
183
Table 9. Supervisory considerations for assigning a score to liquidity risk
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
1
There is a low risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• There is non-material/very low
risk arising from mismatches
(e.g. between maturities,
currencies, etc.).
• The size and composition of the
liquidity buffer is adequate and
appropriate.
• The level of o ther drivers of
liquidity risk (e.g. reputation al
risk, inability to transfer intra -
group liquidity, etc .) is not
material/very low.
• There is c onsistency
between the institution’s
liquidity risk policy and
strategy and its overall
strategy and risk appetite.
• The organisational
framework for liquidity
risk is robust with clear
responsibilities and a clear
separation of tasks
between risk-takers and
management and contr ol
functions.
• Liquidity risk
measurement, monitoring
and reporting systems are
appropriate.
• Internal limits and the
control framework for
liquidity risk are sound
and are in line with the
institution’s risk
management strategy and
risk appetite.
2
There is a medium-
low risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• Mismatches (e.g. between
maturities, currenc ies, etc.)
entail low to medium risk.
• The risk posed by the size and
composition of the liquidity
buffer is low to medium.
• The level of o ther drivers of
liquidity risk (e.g. reputation al
risk, inability to transfer intra -
group liquidity, etc.) is low to
medium.
3
There is a medium -
high risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• Mismatches (e.g. between
maturities, currenc ies, etc.)
entail medium to high risk.
• The risk posed by the size and
composition of the liquidity
buffer is medium to high.
• The level of o ther drivers of
liquidity risk (e.g. reputation al
risk, inability to transfer intra -
group liquidity, etc.) is medium
to high.
• There is not full
consistency between the
institution’s l iquidity risk
policy and strategy and its
overall strategy and risk
appetite.
• The organisational
framework for liquidity
risk does not sufficiently
separate responsibilities
and tasks between risk-
takers and management
and control functions.
• Liquidity risk
measurement, monitoring
and reporting systems are
not undertaken with
sufficient accuracy and
frequency.
4
There is a high risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent ri sk and
the management and
controls.
• Mismatches (e.g. between
maturities, currenc ies, etc.)
entail high risk.
• The risk posed by the size and
composition of the liquidity
buffer is high.
• The level of o ther drivers of
liquidity risk (e.g. reputational

[Page 184]
184
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
risk, inability to transfer intra -
group liquidity, etc.) is high.
• Internal limits and the
control framework for
liquidity risk are not in
line with the institution’s
risk management strategy
or risk appetite.
Table 10. Supervisory considerations for assigning a score to funding risk
Risk
score Supervisory view Considerations in relation to
inherent risk
Considerations in relation to
adequate management and
controls
1
There is a low risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• There is non-material/very low
risk from the institution’s funding
profile or its sustainability.
• The risk posed by the stability of
funding is not material.
• Other drivers of funding risk (e.g.
reputational risk, access to
funding markets, etc .) are not
material/very low.
• There is consistency
between the institution’s
funding risk policy and
strategy and its overall
strategy and risk appetite.
• The organisationa l
framework for funding risk
is robust with clear
responsibilities and a clear
separation of tasks
between risk-takers and
management and control
functions.
• Funding risk
measurement, monitoring
and reporting systems are
appropriate.
• Internal limits and th e
control framework for
funding risk are sound and
are in line with the
institution’s risk
management strategy and
risk appetite.
2
There is a medium-
low risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The risk posed by the
institution’s funding profile and
its sustainability is low to
medium.
• The risk posed by the stability of
funding is low to medium.
• Other drivers of funding risk (e.g.
reputational risk, access to
funding markets, etc.) are low to
medium.
3
There is a medium -
high risk of significant
prudential impact on
the institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The risk posed by the
institution’s funding profile and
its sustainability is medium to
high.
• The risk posed by the stability of
funding is medium to high.
• Other drivers of funding risk (e.g.
reputational risk, access to
• There is not full
consistency between the
institution’s funding risk
policy and strategy and its
overall strategy and risk
appetite.
• The organisational
framework for funding risk

[Page 185]
185
funding markets, etc.) are
medium to high.
does not sufficiently
separate responsibilities
and tasks between risk -
takers and management
and control functions.
• Funding risk
measurement, monitoring
and reporting systems are
not undertaken with
sufficient accuracy and
frequency.
• Internal limits and th e
control framework for
funding risk are not in line
with the institution’s risk
management strategy or
risk appetite.
4
There is a high risk of
significant prudential
impact on the
institution
considering the level
of inherent risk and
the management and
controls.
• The risk posed by the
institution’s funding profile and
its sustainability is high.
• The risk posed by the stability of
funding is high.
• Other drivers of funding risk (e.g.
reputational risk, acc ess to
funding markets, etc.) are high.

[Page 186]
186
SREP liquidity assessment
9.1 General considerations
505. Competent authorities should determine through the SREP liquidity assessment whether
the liquidity and stable funding held by the institution provides appropriate coverage of the
risks to liquidity and funding assessed in accordance with Title 8. Competent authorities should
also determine through the SREP liquidity assessment whether it is necessary to set specific
liquidity requirements to cover risks to liquidity and funding to which an institution is or might
be exposed.
506. Competent authorities should consider the institution’s liquidity buffers, counterbalancing
capacity and funding profile, as well as its ILAAP and arrangements, policies, processes and
mechanisms for measuring and managing liquidity and funding risk, as a key determinant of the
institution’s viability. This determination should be summarised and reflected in a score based
on the criteria specified at the end of this title.
507. The outcomes of the ILAAP, where applicable and relevant, should inform the competent
authority’s conclusion on liquidity adequacy.
508. Competent authorities should conduct t he SREP liquidity assessment process using the
following steps:
a. overall assessment of liquidity;
b. determination of the need for specific liquidity measures;
c. quantification of potential specific liquidity requirements – benchmark
calculations;
d. articulation of specific liquidity requirements; and
e. determination of the liquidity score.
9.2 Overall assessment of liquidity
509. To assess whether the liquidity held by an institution provides appropriate coverage of risks
to liquidity and funding, competent authorities should use the following sources of information:
a. the institution’s ILAAP;
b. the outcomes of the assessment of liquidity risk;

[Page 187]
187
c. the outcomes of the assessment of funding risk;
d. the outcome of the supervisory benchmark calculation; and
e. other relevant inputs (from on-site inspections, peer group analysis, stress testing,
etc.).
510. Competent authorities should consider the reliability of the institution’s ILAAP, including
metrics for liquidity and funding risk used by the institution.
511. When assessing the institution’s ILAAP framework – including, where relevant, internal
methodologies for the calculation of internal liquidity requirements – competent authorities
should assess whether ILAAP calculations are:
a. credible: whether the calculations/methodologies used properly cover the risks
they are looking to address; and
b. understandable: whether there is a clear breakdown and summary of the
underlying components of the ILAAP calculations.
512. For the assessment of the institution’s liquidity adequacy, competent authorities should
also combine their assessments of liquidity risk and funding risk. in particular, they should take
into account findings regarding:
a. risks not covered by liquidity requirements specified in Commission Delegated
Regulation (EU) 2015/61, as regards the LCR, or in the Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
as regards the NSFR, including intraday liquidity risk and liquidity risk beyond the
30-day time period as well as funding risk beyond 1 year;
b. other risks not adequately covered and measured by the institution, as a result of
underestimation of outflows, overestimation of inflows, overestimation of the
liquidity value of buffer assets or counterbalancing capacity, or unavailability from
an operational point of view of liquid assets ( assets not available for sale, assets
that are encumbered, etc.);
c. specific concentrations of counterbalancing capacity and/or funding by
counterparty and/or product/type;
d. funding gaps in specific maturity buckets in the short, medium and long term;
e. appropriate coverage of funding gaps in different currencies;
f. cliff effects; and
g. other relevant outcomes of the supervisory liquidity stress tests.

[Page 188]
188
513. Competent authorities should translate this overall assessment into a liquidity score, which
should reflect the view of competent authorities on the threats to the institution’s viability that
may arise from risks to liquidity and funding.
9.3 Determining the need for specific liquidity requirements
514. Competent authorities should decide on the necessity of specific supervisory liquidity
requirements for the institution based on their supervisory judgement and following dialogue
with the institution, taking into account the following:
a. the institution’s business model and strategy and the supervisory assessment of
them;
b. information from the institution’s ILAAP; and
c. the supervisory assessment of risks to liquidity and funding , including the
assessment of inherent liquidity risk, inherent funding risk and liquidity and funding
risk management and controls, taking into account the possibility that risks and
vulnerabilities identified may exacerbate each other.
515. When competent authorities conclude that specific liquidity requirements are needed to
address liquidity and funding concerns, they should decide on the application of quantitative
requirements, as covered in this title, and/or on the application of qualitative requirements, as
covered in Title 10.
516. When setting structural, long -term supervisory requirements, competent authorities
should consider the need for additional short/medium -term requirements as an interim
solution to mitigate the risks that persist while the structural requirements produce the desired
effects.
517. Where competent authorities conclude that there is a high risk that the institution’s cost of
funding will increase unacceptably, they should consider measures, including setting additional
own funds requirements (as covered in Title 7) to compensate for the increased P&L impact if
the institution cannot pass the increased costs of funding to its customers, or requesting
changes to the funding structure, to mitigate the funding-cost risk.
9.4 Determination of specific quantitative liquidity requirements
518. Competent authorities should develop and appl y supervisory liquidity benchmarks as
quantitative tools to support their assessment o f whether the liquidity held by the institution
provides sound coverage of risks to liquidity and funding . They should be used to provide a
prudent, consistent, transparent and comparable benchmark with which to calculate and
compare specific quantitative liquidity requirements for institutions.

[Page 189]
189
519. When developing supervisory liquidity benchmarks, competent authorities should take into
account the following criteria:
a. benchmarks should be prudent, consistent and transparent;
b. benchmarks should be developed using the supervisory assessment of risks to
liquidity and funding and the supervisory liquidity stress tests; supervisory liquidity
stress testing should be a core part of the benchmark;
c. benchmarks should provide comparable outcomes and calculations so that
quantifications of liquidity requirements for institutions with similar business
models and risk profiles can be compared; and
d. benchmarks should help supervisors to specify the appropriate level of liquidity for
an institution.
520. Given the variety of different business models operated by institutions, the outcome of the
supervisory benchmarks may not be appropriate in every instance for every institution.
Competent authorities should address this by using the most appropriate benchmark where
alternatives are available, and/or by applying judgement to the outcome of the benchmark to
account for business-model-specific considerations.
521. Competent authorities should assess the suitability of any benchmarks applied to
institutions and continually review and update them in light of the experience of using them.
522. When competent authorities take supervisory benchmarks into consideration for the
determination of specific liquidity requirements, as part of the dialogue, they should explain to
the institution the rationale and general underlying principles behind the benchmarks.
523. Where competent authorities have not developed their own benchmark for the
quantification of specific quantitative liquidity requirements, they can apply a benchmark using
the following steps particularly in the case of liquidity risk:
a. comparative analysis, under stressed conditions, of net cash outflows and eligible
liquid assets over a set of time horizons: up to 1 month (including overnight), from
1 month to 3 months and from 3 months to 1 year; for this purpose, competent
authorities should project net outflows (gross outflows and inflows) and
counterbalancing capacity throughout different maturity buckets, considering
stressed conditions (for example, prudent valuation under stress assumptions for
liquid assets versus current valuation under normal conditions and after a haircut),
building a stressed maturity ladder for the year ahead;
b. based on the assessment of the stressed maturity ladder, estimation of the survival
period of the institution;

[Page 190]
190
c. determination of the desired/supervisory minimum survival period, taking into
account the institution’s risk profile and market and macroeconomic conditions;
and
d. if the desired/supervisory minimum survival period is longer than the institution’s
current survival period, competent authorities may estimate additional amounts of
liquid assets (additional liquidity buffers) to be held by the institution to extend its
survival period to the minimum required.
524. A key input to the competent authority’s benchmarks for the quantification of specific
quantitative liquidity requirements will be the data collected through the supervisory reporting
under A rticle 415 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 on liquidity and on stable funding on an
individual and consolidated basis and on additional liquidity monitoring metrics. The design of
benchmarks will be i nfluenced by the content of this reporting and the implementation of
benchmarks will depend on when the reports are available.
525. Below are some examples of the possible approaches:
a. Example 1: institution with an initial liquidity buffer of EUR 1 200 mln Cumulative
inflows and cumulative outflows estimated under stressed conditions are
projected through a time horizon of 5 months. During this time horizon , the
institution makes use of the liquidity buffer each time inflows fall below outflows.
The result is that, under the stressed conditions defined, the institution would be
able to survive 4 .5 months, which is longer than the minimum survival period set
by supervisors (in this example, 3 months):

[Page 191]
191
Table 11. Illustrative example of benchmark for liquidity quantification
Figure 6. Illustrative example of setting specific quantitative liquidity requirement
Time horizon in
months
cumulative
outflows
cumulative
inflows
cumulative net
outflows
net liquidity position (buffer -
cumulative net outflows)
Liquidity available
at day 0
1,200
511 405 106 1,094
598 465 133 1,067
659 531 128 1,072
787 563 224 976
841 642 199 1,001
933 693 240 960
1,037 731 306 894
1,084 788 295 905
1,230 833 397 803
1,311 875 435 765
1,433 875 558 642
1,440 876 564 636
1,465 882 583 617
1,471 889 582 618
1,485 891 594 606
1,485 911 574 626
1,492 916 576 624
1,493 916 577 623
1,581 918 663 537
1,618 945 673 527
1,666 956 710 490
1,719 993 726 474
1,885 1,030 856 344
1,965 1,065 900 300
2,078 1,099 980 220
2,192 1,131 1,061 139 Survival period
2,415 1,163 1,252 -52
2,496 1,194 1,302 -102
2,669 1,224 1,445 -245
2,764 1,253 1,511 -311
1
2
3
4
5

[Page 192]
192
b. Example 2: the supervisory minimum survival period is set at 3 months. An
alternative measure to setting a minimum survival period, which can also address
the supervisory concern that the gap between inflows and outflows is unacceptably
high, is to set a cap on outflows. In the figure below, the mechanism for setting a
cap on outflows is shown by the black horizontal bar. An institution is required to
reduce its outflows to a level below the cap. The cap can be set for one or more
time buckets and for net outflows ( following correction for inflows) or gross
outflows. The alter native of adding a buffer requirement instead is shown in the
third column:
Figure 7. Illustrative example of setting specific quantitative liquidity requirements
9.5 Articulation of specific quantitative liquidity requirements
526. To articulate the specific quantitative liquidity requirements appropriately, competent
authorities should use one of the following approaches, unless another approach is considered
more appropriate in specific circumstances:
a. Approach 1 – require an LCR higher than the regulatory minimum, of such a
size that shortcomings identified are sufficiently mitigated;
b. Approach 2 – require a minimum survival period of such a length that identified
shortcomings are sufficiently mitigated ; the survival period can be set either
directly, as a requirement, or indirectly, by setting a cap on the amount of
outflows over the relevant time buckets considered ; competent authorities
may require different types of liquid assets (e.g. assets eligible for central
banks), to cover risks not (adequately) covered by the LCR;
0
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
<30 D 31-90 D liquidity buffer
Buffer add-on vs. cap on outflows
inflows
outflows
buffer add-on
LCR minimum buffer
cap on outflows

[Page 193]
193
c. Approach 3 – require a minimum total amount of liquid assets or
counterbalancing capacity, either as a minimum total amount or as a minimum
amount in excess of the applicable regulatory minimum, of such a size that
identified shortcomings are sufficiently mitigated; competent authorities may
set requirements for the composition of liquid assets, including operational
requirements (e.g. direct convertibility to cash, or deposit of the liquid assets
at the central bank).
527. To articulate the specific quantitative stable fundi ng requirements appropriately,
competent authorities should use one of the following approaches, unless another approach is
considered more appropriate in specific circumstances:
a. Approach 4 – require a NSFR higher than the regulatory minimum, of such a
size that shortcomings identified are sufficiently mitigated;
b. Approach 5 – require a minimum total amount of available stable funding,
either as a minimum total amount or as a minimum amount in excess of the
applicable regulatory minimum, of such a size that identified shortcomings are
sufficiently mitigated.
528. To ensure there is consistency, competent authorities should structure specific quantitative
liquidity requirements in such a manner as to deliver broadly consistent prudential outcomes
across institutions, bearing in mind that the types of requirements specified may differ between
institutions because of their individual circumstances. In addition to the quantity, the structure
should specify the expected composition and nature of the requirement. In all cases, it should
specify the supervisory requirement and any applicable Directive 2013/36/EU requirements.
Liquidity buffers and counterbalancing capacity held by the institution to meet supervisory
requirements should be available for use by the institution during times of stress.
529. When setting the specific quantitative liquidity requirements and communicating them to
the institution, competent authorities should ensure that they are immediately notified by the
institution if it does not meet the requirements, or does not expect to meet the requirements
in the short term. Competent authorities should ensure that this notification is submitted
without undue delay by the institution, accompanied by a plan drawn up by the institution for
the timely restoration of compliance with the requirements. Competent authorities should
assess the feasibility of the institution’s restoration plan and take appropriate supervisory
measures if the plan is not considered feasible . Where the plan is considered feasible ,
competent authorities should: determine any necessary interim supervisory measure s based
on the circumstances of the institution; monitor the implementation of the restoration plan;
and closely monitor the instituti on’s liquidity position, asking the institution to increase its
reporting frequency if necessary.
530. Notwithstanding the above, competent authorities may also set qualitative requirements
in the form of restrictions/caps/limits on mismatches, concentrations, risk appetite,

[Page 194]
194
quantitative restrictions on the issuance of secured loans, etc., in accordance with the criteria
specified in Title 10 of the guidelines.
531. Below are some examples o f the different approaches for the structure of specific
quantitative liquidity requirements:
Example of specific requirements articulation
As of 1 January 2021 and until otherwise directed, Bank X is required to:
a. Approach 1 – ensure that its counterbalancing capacity is at all times equal to or higher than
e.g. 125% of its liquidity net outflows as measured in the LCR.
b. Approach 2 – ensure that its counterbalancing capacity results at all times in a survival period
that is greater than or equal to 3 months, measured by the internal liquidity stress test / the
maturity ladder / specific metrics developed by the supervisor.
c. Approach 3:
• ensure that its counterbalancing capacity is at all times equal to or higher than
EUR X billion; or
• ensure that its counterbalancing capacity is at all times equal to or higher than
EUR X billion in excess of the minimum requirement under the LCR.
d. Approach 4 – ensure that its available stable funding is at all times equal to or higher than
e.g. 125% of its required stable funding as measured in the NSFR.
e. Approach 5:
• ensure that its available stable funding is at all times equal to or higher than EUR X billion;
or
• ensure that its available stable funding is at all times equal to or higher than EUR X billion
in excess of the minimum requirement under the NSFR.
9.6 Summary of findings and scoring
532. Following the above assessment, competent authorities should form a view on whether
existing liquidity resources provide sound coverage of the risks to which the institution is or
might be exposed. This view should be refl ected in a summary of findings, accompanied by a
viability score based on the considerations specified in Table 12.

[Page 195]
195
533. For the joint decision (where relevant), competent authorities should use the liquidity
assessment and score to determine whether the liquidity resources are adequate.
Table 12. Supervisory considerations for assigning a score to liquidity adequacy
Score Supervisory view Considerations
1 The institution ’s liquidity position
and funding profile pose a low level
of risk to the viability of the
institution.
• The institution’s counterbalancing
capacity and liquidity buffers are
comfortably above specific supervisory
quantitative requirements and are
expected to remain so in the future.
• The composition and stability of longer -
term funding (> 1 year) pose non-
material/very low risk in relation to the
activities and business model of the
institution.
• The free flow of liquidity between
entities in the group, where relevant, is
not impeded, or all entities have a
counterbalancing capacity and liquidity
buffers above supervisory requirements.
• The institution has a plausible and
credible liquidity contingency plan that
has the potential to be effective if
required.
2 The institution ’s liquidity position
and/or funding profile pose a
medium-low level of risk to the
viability of the institution.
• The institution’s counterbalancing
capacity and liquidity buffers are above
the specific supervisory quantitative
requirements, but there is a risk that
they will not remain so.
• The composition and stability of longer-
term funding (> 1 year) pose a low level
of risk in relation to the activities and
business model of the institution.
• The free flow of liquidity between
entities in the group, where relevant, is
or could be marginally impeded.
• The institution has a p lausible and
credible liquidity contingency plan that ,
although not without risk , has the
potential to be effective if required.
3 The institution ’s liquidity position
and/or funding profile pose a
medium-high level of risk to the
viability of the institution.
• The institution’s counterbalancing
capacity and liquidity buffers are
deteriorating and/or are below specific
supervisory quantitative requirements,
and there are concerns about the
institution’s ability to restore compliance

[Page 196]
196
Score Supervisory view Considerations
with these requirements in a timely
manner.
• The composition and stability of longer -
term funding (> 1 year) pose a medium
level of risk in relation to the activities
and business model of the institution.
• The free flow of liquidity between
entities in the group, where relevant, is
impeded.
• The institution has a liquidity
contingency plan that is unlikely to be
effective.
4 The institution ’s liquidity position
and/or funding profile pose a high
level of risk to the viabilit y of the
institution.
• The institution’s counterbalancing
capacity and liquidity buffers are rapidly
deteriorating and/or are below the
specific supervisory quantitative
requirements, and there are serious
concerns about the institution’s ability to
restore compliance with these
requirements in a timely manner.
• The composition and stability of longer -
term funding (>1 year) pose a high level
of risk in relation to the activities and
business model of the institution.
• The free flow of liquidity between
entities in the group, where relevant, is
severely impeded.
• The institution has no liquidity
contingency plan, or one that is
manifestly inadequate.

[Page 197]
197
Overall SREP assessment and
application of supervisory measures
10.1 General considerations
534. This title covers the combination of the findings of the assessments of the SREP element s
into the overall SREP assessment. It also addresses the application by competent authorities of
supervisory measures to address deficiencies identified through the assessment of the SREP
elements. Competent authorities may apply supervisory measures as specified in
Directive 2013/36/EU (Articles 102, 104 and 105) and national law, and, when applicable, early
intervention measures as specified in Article 27 of Directive 2014/59/EU, or any combination
of the above.
535. Competent authorities should exercise their supervisory powers on the basis of deficiencies
identified during the assessments of the individual SREP elements and taking into account the
overall SREP assessment, including the score, considering the following:
a. the materiality of the deficiencies/vulnerabilities and the potential prude ntial
impact of not addressing the issue (i.e. whether it is necessary to address the issue
with a specific measure);
b. whether the measures are consistent with/proportionate to their overall
assessment of a particular SREP element (and the overall SREP assessment);
c. whether supervisory or other administrative measures are needed to address
prudential deficiencies/vulnerabilities related to ML/TF risks within their
supervisory remi t after having liaised with the relevant AML/CFT supervisors in
accordance with Section 8 of the AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines50;
d. whether the deficiencies/vulnerabilities have already been addressed/covered by
other measures;
e. whether other measures would achieve the same objective with less of an
administrative and financial impact on the institution;
f. the optimal level and duration of application of the measure to achieve the
supervisory objective;
50 Guidelines on cooperation and information exchange between prudential supervisors, AML/CFT supervisors and
financial intelligence units under Directive 2013/36/EU (EBA/GL/2021/15).

[Page 198]
198
g. the possibility that risks and vulnerabilities identifie d may be correlated or self -
reinforcing, or both, meriting an increase in the rigorousness of supervisory
measures; and
h. the results of resolvability assessment by the resolution authority, including the
related work program me, with a view to ensuring consi stency of supervisory
actions.
536. When applying supervisory measures to address specif ic deficiencies identified in the
assessment of SREP elements, competent authorities should take into account overall
quantitative own funds and liquidity requirements to be applied based on the criteria specified
in Titles 7 and 9.
537. When applying supervisory measures to address prudential deficiencies related to ML/TF
risk, competent authorities should engage with AML/CFT supervisors so that the underlying
deficiencies/vulnerabilities are adequately addressed by the appropriate measures within the
respective remit of AML/CFT supervisors and competent authorities from their respective
perspectives51.
538. Competent authorities may take supervisory measures directly linked to the outcomes of
any supervisory activities (e.g. on-site examinations, assessments of the suitability of members
of the management body and key functions, etc .) where the outcomes of such activities
necessitate immediate application of supervisory measures to address material deficiencies.
10.2 Overall SREP assessment
539. In determining the overall SREP assessment , competent authorities should consider the
findings of the assessments of the SREP elements, specifically:
a. the risks to which the institution is or may be exposed;
b. the likelihood that the institution’s governance, control deficiencies and/or
business model or strategy are likely to exacerbate or mitigate these risks, or
expose the institution to new sources of risk;
c. whether the institution’s own funds and liquidity resources provide sound
coverage of these risks; and
d. the potential for positive and negative interaction between the elements (e.g.
competent authorities may consider a strong capital position as a potential
mitigating factor for certain concerns identified in the area of liquidity and funding,
or by contrast, that a weak capital position may exacerbate concerns in that area).
51 In accordance with the EBA AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines (EBA/GL/2021/15).

[Page 199]
199
540. On the basis of these considerations , competent authorities should determine the
institution’s viability, defined as its proximity to a point of non -viability on the basis of the
adequacy of its own funds and liquidity resources, governance, controls and/or business model
or strategy to cover the risks to which it is or may be exposed.
541. On the basis of this determination, competent authorities should:
a. take any supervisory measures necessary to address concerns;
b. determine future supervisory resourcing and planning for the institution, including
whether any specific supervisory activities should be planned for the institution as
part of the Supervisory Examination Programme;
c. determine the need for early interventio n measures as specified in Article 27 of
Directive 2014/59/EU; and
d. determine whether the institution can be considered to be ‘failing or likely to fail’
within the meaning of Article 32 of Directive 2014/59/EU.
542. The overall SREP assessment should be reflected in a viability score based on the
considerations specified in Table 13 and clearly documented in an annual summary of the
overall SREP assessment. This annual summary should also include the overall SREP score and
scores for elements of the SREP, and any supervisory findings made over the course of the
previous 12 months.
Table 13. Supervisory considerations for assigning the overall SREP score
Score Supervisory view Considerations
1 The risks identified pose a low level of
risk to the viability of the institution.
• The institution’s business model and
strategy do not raise concerns.
• The internal governance and institution -
wide control arrangements do not raise
concerns.
• The institution’s risks to capital and
liquidity pose a non-material/a very low
risk of a significant prudential impact.
• The composition and quantity of own
funds held do not raise concerns.
• The institution ’s liquidity position and
funding profile do not raise concerns.
• No material concerns about the credibility
and feasibility of the institution’s recovery
plan including its overall recovery capacity.

[Page 200]
200
Score Supervisory view Considerations
2 The risks identified pose a medium-
low level of risk to the viability of the
institution.
• There is a low to medium level of concern
about the institution’s business model and
strategy.
• There is a low to medium level of concern
about the institution’s governance or
institution-wide control arrangements.
• There is a low to medium level of risk of a
significant prudential impact caused by
risks to capital and liquidity.
• There is a low to medium level of concern
about the composition and quantity of
own funds held.
• There is a low to medium level of concern
about the institution's liquidity position
and/or funding profile.
• There is a low to medium level of concern
about the credibility and feasibility of the
institution’s recovery plan including its
overall recovery capacity.
3
The risks identified pose a medium -
high level of risk to the viability of the
institution.
• There is a medium to high level of concern
about the institution’s business model and
strategy.
• There is a medium to high level of concern
about the institution’s governance or
institution-wide control arrangements.
• There is a medium to high level of risk of a
significant prudential impact caused by
risks to capital and liquidity.
• There is a medium to high level of concern
about the composition and quantity of
own funds held by the institution.
• There is a medium to high level of concern
about the institution ’s liquidity position
and/or funding profile.
• There is a medium to high level of concern
about the credibility and feasibility of the
institution’s recovery plan including its
overall recovery capacity.
4 The risks identified pose a high level of
risk to the viability of the institution.
• There is a high level of concern about the
institution’s business model and strategy.
• There is a high level of concern about the
institution’s governance or institution -
wide control arrangements.

[Page 201]
201
Score Supervisory view Considerations
• There is a high level of risk of a significant
prudential impact caused by risks to capital
and liquidity.
• There is a high level of concern about the
composition and quant ity of own funds
held by the institution.
• There is a high level of concern about the
institution’s liquidity position and/or
funding profile.
• There is a high level of concern about the
credibility and feasibility of the institution’s
recovery plan including its overall recovery
capacity.
F The institution is considered to be
‘failing or likely to fail’.
• There is an immediate risk to the viability
of the institution.
• The institution meet s the conditions for
failing or likely to fail, as specified in
Article 32(4) of Directive 2014/59/EU52.
543. When determining that an institution is ‘failing or likely to fail’ , as reflected by an overall
SREP score of ‘F’, competent authorities should engage with the resolution authorities to
consult on findings following the procedure specified in Article 32 of Directive 2014/59/EU.
10.3 Application of capital measures
544. Competent authorities should impose additional own funds requirements and establish
own funds expectations by setting TSCR and determining P2G where relevant in accordance
with the process and criteria specified in Title 7.
545. Notwithstanding t he requirements referred to in the previous paragraph, compet ent
authorities may, on the basis of the vulnerabilities and deficiencies identified in the assessment
of SREP elements, impose additional capital measures including:
52 In particular, the competent authority is of the view that (1) the institution infringes, or there are objective elements
to support a determination that the institution will, in the near future, infringe, the requirements for continuing
authorisation in a way that would justify the withdrawal of the authorisation by the competent authority, for reasons
including but not limited to the fact that the institution has incurred or is likely to incur losses that will deplete all or a
significant amount of its own funds; (2) the institution’s assets are, or there are objective elements to support a
determination that the institution’s assets will, in the near future, be, less than its liabilities; or (3) the institution is, or
there are objective elements to support a determination that the institution will, in the near future, be, unable to pay its
debts or other liabilities as they fall due.
Article 32(4)(d) of Directive 2014/59/EU also identifies extraordinary public support criteria for the determination of
whether an institution is failing or likely to fail, but these criteria are not considered for the purpose of SREP and the
determination made by the competent authorities.

[Page 202]
202
a. requiring the institution to use net profit s to strengthen own funds in accordance
with Article 104(1)(h) of Directive 2013/36/EU;
b. restricting or prohibiting distributions or interest payments by the institution to
shareholders, members or holders of Additional Tier 1 instruments where such a
prohibition does not constitute an event of default of the institution in accordance
with Article 104(1)(i) of Directive 2013/36/EU; and/or
c. requiring the institution to apply a specific provisioning policy or treatment of
assets in terms of own funds requirements in accordance with Article 104(1)(d) of
Directive 2013/36/EU.
10.4 Application of liquidity measures
546. Competent authorities should impose specific liquidity requirements in accordance with
the process and criteria specified in Title 9.
547. Notwithstanding the specific quantitative requirements referred to in the previous
paragraph, competent authorities may , on the basis of the vulnerabilities and deficiencies
identified in the assessment of risks to liquidity and funding , impose additional liquidity
measures including:
a. imposing specific liquidity requirements, including restrictions on maturity
mismatches between assets and liabilities in accordance with Article 104(1)(k) of
Directive 2013/36/EU; and/or,
b. imposing administrative penalties or other administrative measures, includi ng
prudential charges, in accordance with Article 105 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
10.5 Application of other supervisory measures
548. To address specific deficiencies identified in the assessment of SREP elements, competent
authorities may consider applying measures that are not directly linked to quantitative capital
or liquidity requirements. This section provides a non -exhaustive list of possible supervisory
measures that can be applied based on Articles 104 and 105 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
Competent authorities may apply other supervisory measures as set out in those articles if
these are more appropriate to address the identified deficiencies as described in this section.
The choice of measures should take into account the results of assessment performed in
accordance with Titles 4, 5, 6 and 8 of these guidelines.
549. If after liaising with the AML/CFT competent authority, there is a need for competent
authorities to address prudential deficiencies/vulnerabilities related to ML/TF risks as a result
of the SREP eleme nts assessment, competent authorities should set additional own funds
requirements only where this is considered more appropriate than other supervisory measures.

[Page 203]
203
If additional own funds requirements are imposed, they should be used as an interim measure
while the deficiencies are addressed.
Business model analysis
550. Supervisory measures to address deficiencies identified in the BMA are likely to involve
requiring the institution to adjust governance and control arrangements to help with the
implementation of the business model and strategy, or limiting certain business activities.
551. In accordance with Article 104(1)(b) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may
require the institution to make adjustments to risk management and control arrangements, or
to governance arrangements , to match the desired business model or strategy, by means
including:
a. adjusting the financial plan assumed in the strategy, if it is not supported by
internal capital planning or credible assumptions;
b. requiring changes to organisational structures, reinforcement of risk management
and control functions and arrangements to support the implementation of the
business model or strategy; and/or
c. requiring changes to and reinforcement of IT sy stems to support the
implementation of the business model or strategy.
552. In accordance with Article 104(1)(e) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may
require the institution to make changes to the business model or strategy where:
a. they are not supported by appropriate organisational, governance or risk control
and management arrangements;
b. they are not supported by capital and operational plans, including allocation of
appropriate financial, human and technological (IT) resources; and/or
c. there are significant concerns about the sustainability of the business model.
553. In accordance with Article 104(1)(f) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may:
a. require institutions to reduce the risk inherent in the products they
originate/distribute, by means including:
o requiring changes to the risks inherent in certain product offerings;
and/or
o requiring improvements to the governance and control arrangements
for product development and maintenance;

[Page 204]
204
b. require the institution to reduce the risk inherent in its systems, by various means
including:
o requiring improvements to the systems, or increasing the level of
investment or speeding -up the implementation of new systems;
and/or
o requiring improvements to the governance and control arrangements
for system development and maintenance;
c. require institutions to reduce the risk inherent in their activities, including
outsourced activities, by various means including:
o requiring changes to or reduction of certain activities with a view to
reducing their inherent risk; and/or
o requiring improvements to governance and control arrangements and
oversight of outsourced activities.
Internal governance and institution-wide controls
554. Supervisory measures to address deficiencies identified in the assessment of internal
governance and institution-wide controls may focus on requiring the institution to strengthen
governance and control arrangements, or reduc ing the risk inherent in its pr oducts, systems
and operations.
555. In accordance with Article 104(1)(b) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may:
a. require the institution to make changes to its overall governance arrangements and
organisation, by means including requiring:
o changes to the organisational or functional structure, including
reporting lines;
o amendments to risk policies or how the y are developed an d
implemented across the organisation; and/or
o an increase in the transparency of governance arrangements;
b. require the institution to make changes to the organisation, composition or
working arrangements of the management body;
c. require the institution to strengthen its overall risk management arrangements, by
means including requiring:
o changes to (a reduction in) risk app etite, or the governance
arrangements for setting risk appetite, and the development of the
overall risk strategy;

[Page 205]
205
o improvements to ICAAP or ILAAP procedures and models, where they
are not deemed fit for purpose;
o enhancement of stress testing capacities and the overall stress testing
programme; and/or
o enhancements to contingency planning;
d. require the institution to strengthen internal control arrangements and functions,
by means including requiring:
o the independence and adequate staffing of the internal audit function;
and/or
o improvements to the internal reporting process to ensure that
reporting to the management body is appropriate;
e. require the institution to enhance information systems or business continuity
arrangements, for example by requiring:
o improvements in the reliability of systems; and/or
o development and testing of business continuity plans.
556. In accordance with Article 104(1)(g) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may
require the institution to:
a. make changes to remuneration polices; and/or
b. limit variable remuneration as a percentage of net revenues.
557. Based on the outcomes of the qualitative review of stress testing programmes and i f
deficiencies are identified, competent authorities should require the institution:
a. to develop a plan of remedial action aimed at improving stress testing programmes and
practices. Where material shortcomings are identified in how an institution addresses the
outputs of stress tests, or if management actions are not deemed credible, competent
authorities should require the institution to take further remedial actions, including
requirements to make changes to the institution’s capital plan;
b. where appropriate, to run specific prescribed scenarios (or elements of those) or using
specific assumptions.
Credit and counterparty risk
558. Supervisory measures to address deficiencies identified in the assessment of the credit and
counterparty risk and the associated management and control arrangements are likely to focus

[Page 206]
206
on requiring the institution to reduce the level of inherent risk or strengthening management
and control arrangements.
559. In accordance with Article 104(1)(b) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may
require the institution to:
a. involve the management body or its committees more actively in relevant credit
decisions;
b. improve credit risk measurement systems;
c. improve controls on credit processes, including credit granting, monitoring and
recovery;
d. enhance collateral management, evaluation and monitoring; and/or
e. enhance the quality and frequency of reporting on credit risk to the management
body and senior management.
560. In accordance with Article 104(1)(d) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may
require the institution to:
a. apply a specific provisioning policy, and – where permitted by accounting rules and
regulations – require it to increase provisions;
b. adjust internal risk parameters and/or risk weights used to calculate risk exposure
amounts for specific products, sectors or types of obligors; and/or
c. apply higher haircuts to the value of collateral.
561. In accordance with Article 104(1)(e) and (f) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities
may require the institution to:
a. reduce large exposures or other sources of credit concentration risk;
b. tighten credit-granting criteria for all or some product or obligor categories;
c. reduce its exposure to, or acquire protection for, specific types of facilities (e.g.
mortgages, export finance, c ommercial real estate, securitis ations, etc.), oblig or
categories, sectors, countries, etc.; and/or
d. implement an appropriate strategy to reduce the amount or share of non -
performing exposures.
Market risk

[Page 207]
207
562. Supervisory measures to address deficiencies identified in the assessment of market risk
and the associated management and control arrangements are likely to focus on requiring the
institution to reduce the level of inherent risk or to strengthen managemen t and control
arrangements.
563. In accordance with Article 104(1)(b) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may
require the institution to address deficiencies identified with regard to the institution’s ability
to identify, measure, monitor and control market risk, by means including:
a. enhancing the performance of the institution’s internal approaches, or of its
backtesting or stress testing capacity;
b. enhancing the quality and frequency of the market risk reporting to the
institution’s management body and senior management; and/or
c. requiring more frequent and in-depth internal audits of market activity.
564. In accordance with Article 104(1)(e) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may:
a. restrict investment in certain products when the institution’s policies and
procedures do not ensure that the risk from those products will be adequately
covered and controlled;
b. require the institution to present a plan to reduce its exposures to distressed assets
and/or illiquid positions gradually; and/or
c. require the divestment of financial products when the valuation processes of the
institution do not produce conservative valuations that comply with the standards
of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013.
565. In accordance with Article 104(1)(f) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may:
a. require the institution to reduce the level of inherent market risk (through hedging
or sale of assets) when significant shortcomings have been found in the
institution’s measurement systems; and/or
b. require the institution to increase the amount of derivatives settled through central
counterparties (CCPs).
Operational risk
566. Supervisory measures to address deficiencies identified in the assessment of operational
risk and the associated management and control arrangements are likely to focus on requiring
the institution to reduce the level of inherent risk or strengthening management and control
arrangements.

[Page 208]
208
567. In accordance with Article 104(1)(b) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may:
a. require the institution to involve the management body or its committees more
actively in operational risk management decisions;
b. require the institution to consider inherent operational risk when approving new
products and systems; and/or
c. require the institution to improve operational risk identification and measurement
systems.
568. In accordance with Article 104(1)(e) and (f) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities
may:
a. require the institution to reduce the scope and/or extent of outsourcing activities
including restructuring or exiting from outsourcing arrangements and switching to
another service provider;
b. require the institution to mitigate operational risk exposures (e.g. with insurance,
introduction of more control points, etc.);
c. require the institution to take specific corrective measures to enhance its overall
internal governance arrangements including risk management framework and
internal controls;
d. require the institution to define and monitor specific KRIs and/or KPIs;
e. restrict or limit the business, operations or network of institutions or to request the
divestment of activities that pose excessive risks to the soundness of an institution;
and/or
f. require the reduction of the risk inherent in the activities, products and systems of
institutions, including the ML/TF risks with prudential implications.
Interest rate risk from non-trading activities
569. Irrespective of the requirement to hold additional own funds pursuant to Article 104(1)(a)
of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities should consider the application of supervisory
measures in the following cases:
a. when any of the cases referred to in points (a) or (b) of Article 98(5) of Directive
2013/36/EU apply; or
b. when the out comes of the SREP reveal any deficiency in the institution’s
assessment of the inherent level of IRRBB and the associated management and
control arrangements.

[Page 209]
209
570. In accordance with Article 104(1)(b) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may
require the institution to take action to address deficiencies in its ability to identify, measure,
monitor and control interest rate risk from non-trading activities, for example to:
a. enhance its stress testing capacity; and/or
b. enhance reporting of IRRBB management information to the institution’s
management body and senior management.
571. In accordance with Article 104(1)(f) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may
require the institution to apply variations to internal limits to reduce the risk inherent in
activities, products and systems.
572. In accordance with Article 104(1)(j) of Directive 2013/36/EU and subject to paragraph (2)
of that Article, competent authorities may require additional or more frequent reporting of the
institution’s IRRBB positions.
573. Where considered necessary, competent authorities may also apply measures i n
accordance with Article 84(3) of Directive 2013/36/EU.
Liquidity risk
574. In accordance with Article 104(1)(k) of Directive 2013/36/EU and as established in
paragraphs (1) and (6) of Article 8 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 to specify
the LCR, as regards diversification of the liquidity buffer and currency consistency between
liquid assets and net outflows, competent authorities may:
a. impose requirements on the concentration of the liquid assets held, including:
o requirements for the composition of the institution’s liquid -assets
profile in respect of counterparties, currency, etc.; and/or
o caps, limits or restrictions on funding concentrations;
b. impose restrictions on short-term contractual or behavioural maturity mismatches
between assets and liabilities, including:
o limits on maturity mismatches (in specific time buckets) between
assets and liabilities;
o limits on minimum survival periods; and/or
o limits on dependency on certain short -term funding sources, such as
money market funding.

[Page 210]
210
575. In accordance with Article 104(1)(j) of Directive 2013/36/EU and subject to paragraph (2)
of that Article, competent authorities may impose a requirement for the institution to provide
more frequent reporting on liquidity positions, including:
a. the frequency of regulatory reporting on LCR; and/or
b. the frequency and granularity of other liquidity reports, such as ‘a dditional
monitoring metrics’.
576. In accordance with Article 104(1)(b) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may
require action to be taken to address deficiencies identified with regard to the institution’s
ability to identify, measure, monitor and control liquidity risk, by means including:
a. enhancing its stress testing capacity to improve its ability to identify and quantify
material sources of liquidity risk to the institution;
b. enhancing its ability to monetise its liquid assets;
c. enhancing its liqu idity contingency plan and liquidity early warning indicators
framework; and/or
d. enhancing reporting of liquidity management information to the institution’s
management body and senior management.
Funding risk
577. In accordance with Article 104(1)(k) of Directive 2013/36/EU and taking into account Article
428b(5) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, as regards currency consistency between available
and required stable funding in the NSFR, competent authorities may require action to be taken
to amend the institution’s funding profile, including:
a. reducing its dependency on certain (potentially volatile) funding markets, such as
wholesale funding;
b. reducing the concentration of its funding profile with respect to counterparties,
peaks in the long-term maturity profile, (mismatches in) currencies, etc.; and/or
c. reducing the amount of its encumbered assets, potentially differentiating between
total encumbrance and overcollateralisation (e.g. for covered bonds, margin calls,
etc.).
578. In accordance with Article 104(1)(j) of Directive 2013/36/EU and subject to paragraph (2)
of that Article , competent authorities may require additional or more frequent reporting on
the institution’s funding positions, including:

[Page 211]
211
a. increased frequency of regulatory reporting relevant to the monitoring of the
funding profile (such as the NSFR report and ‘additional monitoring metrics’);
and/or
b. increased frequency of reporting on the institution’s funding plan to the supervisor.
579. In accordance with Article 104(1)(b) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities may:
a. require actions to be taken to address deficiencies identified with regard to the
institution’s control of funding risk, including:
o enhancing reporting on funding risk to the institution’s management
body and senior management;
o restating or enhancing the funding plan; and/or
o placing limits on its risk appetite;
b. enhance the institution’s stress testing capabilities by means including requiring
the institution to cover a longer stress period.
10.6 Supervisory reaction to a situation where TSCR or OCR is not
met
580. TSCR is a legally binding requirement that institutions have to meet at all times, including
in stressed conditions. If TSCR set in accordance with these guidelines is no longer met, the
competent authorities should consider additional intervention powers in accordance with
Directives 2013/36/EU and 2014/59/EU, includ ing withdrawal of authorisation in accordance
with Article 18(d) of Directive 2013/36/EU, application of early intervention measures in
accordance with Article 27 of Directive 2014/59/EU and resolution actions in accordance with
that Directive. When exercising those powers competent authorities should consider whether
measures are proportionate to the circumstances and their judgement on how the situation is
likely to develop.
581. A breach of TSCR should also be considered in determining if an institution is failing or likely
to fail in accordance with Article 3 2(4)(a) of Directive 2014/59/EU and the EBA Guidelines on
the interpretation of the different circumstances when an institution shall be considered as
failing or likely to fail, as it is one of the conditions under which the competent authorities may
withdraw authorisation in accordance with Article 18(d) of Directive 2013/36/EU.
582. Competent authorities should also monitor whether the institutions meet the OCR. Where
necessary, competent authorities should take measures to ensure that institutions comply with
requirements set out in Articles 141 to 142 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
10.7 Supervisory reaction to a situation where P2G is not met

[Page 212]
212
583. Competent authorities should monitor whether the amount of own funds expected
according to P2G is established and maintained by the institution over time.
584. When the institution’s own funds drop, or are likely to drop , below the level determined
by P2G, the competent authority should expect the institution to notify it and prepare a revised
capital plan. In its notification, the institution should explain what adverse consequences are
likely to force it to do so and what actions are envisaged for the eventual restoration of
compliance with P2G as part of an enhanced supervisory dialogue.
585. There are generally three situations to be considered by a competent authority in which an
institution could fail to meet its P2G.
a. Where the level of own funds falls below the level of P2G (while remaining above
OCR) in institution-specific or external circumstances in which risks that P2G was
aimed at covering have materialised, the competent authority may allow the
institution to temporarily operate below the level of P2G provided that the revised
capital plan is considered credible in accordance with the criteria set out in Section
7.7.2. The competent authority may also consider adjusting the level of P2G where
appropriate.
b. Where the level of own funds falls below the level of P2G (while remaining above
the OCR) in institution -specific or external circumstances as a result of the
materialisation of risks that P2G was not aimed at covering, competent authorities
should expect the institution to increase the level of own funds to the level of P2G
within an appropriate timeline.
c. Where the institution disregards P2G, does not incorporate it into it risk
management framework or does not establish own funds to meet P2G within the
time limits set in accordance with paragraph 438, this may lead to competent
authorities applying additional supervisory measures as set out in Sections 10.3 and
10.5.
Where the permission to operate below the level of P2G as referred to in point (a) has
not been granted and the institution’s own funds are repeatedly below the level of P2G,
the competent authority should impose additional own funds requirements in
accordance with Title 7.
586. Notwithstanding particular supervisory response s in accordance with the previous
paragraph, competent a uthorities may also consider the application of the capital and
additional supervisory measures set out in Sections 10.3 and 10.5 , where these are deemed
more appropriate to address the reasons for the own funds falling below the level determined
by P2G.

[Page 213]
213
10.8 Interaction between supervisory and early intervention
measures
587. In addition to the supervisory measures referred to in this title, competent authorities may
apply early intervention measures as specified in Article 27 of Directive 2014/59/EU, which are
intended to supplement the set of supervisory measures specified in Articles 104 and 105 of
Directive 2013/36/EU.
588. Competent authorities should apply early intervention measures without prejudice to any
other supervisory measures, and w hen applying early intervention measures, should choose
the most appropriate measure(s) to ensure a response that is proportionate to the particular
circumstances.
10.9 Interaction between supervisory and macroprudential
measures
589. Where an institution is subject to macroprudential measures and the SREP assessment
determines that these macroprudential measures do not adequately address the institution -
specific risk profile or deficiencies present in the institution (i.e. the institution is exposed to or
poses a higher level of risk than the level targeted by the macroprudential measure, or the
deficiencies identified are more material than those targeted by the measure), comp etent
authorities should consider supplementing the macroprudential measures with additional
institution-specific measures.
10.10 Interaction between supervisory and AML/CFT measures
590. Where competent authorities in the course of exercising their supervisory activities have
reasonable indications of deficiencies in the institution’s systems and controls framework or
the internal governance framework that are related to AML/CFT or reasonable grounds to
suspect that the institution has increased exposure to ML/TF risks, they should:
a. notify the AML/CFT supervisor of these deficiencies and risks as soon as they are
identified and liaise with them in line with the AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines53;
b. assess the impact that such deficiencie s and risks may have on the prudential
situation of the institution;
c. liaise with AML/CFT supervisors and in line with the respective authorities’
mandates and functions, consider the most appropriate prudential supervisory
measures to address these deficiencies and risks in addition to any measures taken
by the AML/CFT supervisors.
53 EBA AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines (EBA/GL/2021/15).

[Page 214]
214
591. Where the competent authorities are notified or become aware of supervisory measures
or sanctions planned or imposed by the AML/CFT supervisors, they should consider whether
and how the potential prudential implications of the weaknesses and failures identified by the
AML/CFT supervisors need to be mitigated.

[Page 215]
215
Application of the SREP to
cross-border groups
592. This title addresses the application of the common SREP procedures and meth odology as
specified in these guidelines in relation to cross-border groups and their entities. It also
provides links with the joint assessment and decision process to be carried out pursuant to
Article 113 of Directive 2013/36/EU and Commission Implement ing Regulation
(EU) No 710/2014 with regard to conditions of application of the joint decision process for
institution-specific prudential requirements.
593. In the SREP, competent authorities should also consider the potential ML/TF risks, taking
into account input received from the AML/CFT competent authority of the Member State
where a parent undertaking is established as well as AML/CFT supervisors responsible for the
AML/CFT supervision of establishments of the group in different jurisdictions, in particular the
assessments of ML/TF risks, material weaknesses and breaches of AML/CFT legislation, that are
linked to the cross-border banking group structure.
594. When assessing prudential implications of ML/TF risks in the SREP for a cross-border group,
competent authorities should leverage the information obtained through bilateral
engagements with relevant AML/CFT competent authorities in accordance with the AML /CFT
Cooperation Guidelines and through their participation in AML/CFT colleges 54 and prudential
colleges.
11.1 Application of the SREP to cross-border groups
595. When applying the SREP and these guidelines to cross -border groups, competent
authorities should assess the viability of the group as a whole, as well as its individual entities.
This can be done by dividing the process into two stages: (1) competent authorities make an
initial assessment of entities under their direct supervision, and (2) competent authorities
jointly discuss and finalise the assessment w ithin the framework of colleges of supervisors
pursuant to the requirements of Articles 113 and 116 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
596. In accordance with the scope of application of the guidelines as discussed in Title 1:
a. consolidating supervisors should perform the initial assessment of the parent
undertaking and the group of institutions on a consolidated level; and
54 AML/CFT colleges as defined in the Joint guidelines on cooperation and information exchange for the purpose of
Directive (EU) 2015/849 between competent authorities supervis ing credit and financial institutions (‘The AML/CFT
Colleges Guidelines’).

[Page 216]
216
b. competent authorities should perform the initial assessment on the entities under
their supervision (individual, or sub-consolidated, where relevant).
597. Where these guidelines are applied to the subsidiaries of a cross-border group as specified
in the paragraph above, competent authorities for subsidiaries should, when performing their
initial assessment, primarily consider institutions on an individual basis, i.e. assess the business
model, strategy, internal governance and institution-wide controls, risks to capital and liquidity,
and capital and liquidity adequacy of an entity as they would a standalone institution. The
findings from such initial assessments, where relevant, should also include identification of key
vulnerabilities in the cross-border or group context, which may be related to the reliance of an
institution on its parent/group for funding , capital, technological support , etc. In their initial
assessments made on an individual basis, competent authorities should also reflect strengths
and mitigating factors related to the entity being part of the group, which may be related to
group technological support, financial support arrangements, etc.
598. The results of any such initial assessment of the SREP elements, including, if identified,
views on key dependencies on the parent/group, should serve as an input into the joint
assessment and decision p rocess pursuant to the requirements of Article 113 of
Directive 2013/36/EU, and should therefore be discussed by the competent authorities within
the framework of the colleges of supervisors established pursuant to Article 116 of
Directive 2013/36/EU.
599. Following the discussions within the framework of colleges of supervisors and outcomes of
the joint assessment process, competent authorities should finalise their respective SREP
assessments, making the necessary adjustments based on the outco mes of the college
discussions.
600. Where a competent authority’s initial assessment has revealed specific deficiencies related
to intra -group positions (e.g. high concentration of exposures to the parent undertaking,
reliance on intra-group funding, concerns about the sustainability of an entity’s strategy, etc.)
negatively affecting the overall viability of the entity on a n individual basis, competent
authorities should, within the framework of th e colleges of supervisors , discuss whether the
final assessment of an entity should be changed considering the overall group dimension,
including the consolidated group business model, strategy and existence and specific features
of intra-group financial support arrangements.
601. Competent authorities should discuss and coordinate the following within the framework
of colleges of supervisors:
a. planning, including frequency, and timelines for performing the assessment of
various SREP elements for the consolidate d group and its entities to facilitate
preparation of the group risk and liquidity risk reports required for the joint
decisions as specified in Article 113 of Directive 2013/36/EU;

[Page 217]
217
b. details of the application of benchmarks used for the assessment of SREP elements;
c. approach to assessing and scoring subcategories of risks individually, where such
subcategories have been identified as material;
d. inputs required from the institution at consolidated and entity level for conducting
the assessment of SREP elements, including those from the ICAAP and ILAAP;
e. outcomes of the assessment, including the SREP scores assigned to various
elements, and the overall SREP assessment and overall SREP score at consolidated
and entity level. When discussing the assessment of individual risks to capital and
liquidity, competent authorities should focus on the risks that are identified as
material for the respective entities;
f. cross-border prudential implications of ML/TF risks and concerns; and
g. planned supervisory and early intervention measures, if relevant.
602. When preparing the summary of the overall SREP assessment for the cross-border group
and its entities, competent authorities should structure it in a way that will facilitate filling in
the templates for the SREP report, group risk report, liquidity risk assessment and group
liquidity risk assessment report templates required for the joint decision under A rticle 113 of
Directive 2013/36/EU as specified in the Commission Implementing Regulation
(EU) No 710/2014 with regard to conditions of application of the joint decision process for
institution-specific prudential requirements.
11.2 SREP capital assessment and institution-specific prudential
requirements
603. The determination of capital adequacy and related requirements and guidance in
accordance with the process described in Title 7 for cross-border groups is part of the
competent authorities’ joint decision process pursuant to Article 113 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
604. The exercise of supervisory powers and the taking of supervisory measures, including with
regard to imposing additional own funds pursuant to Article 104(1)(a) at consolidated or
individual entity level as specified in Title 7 should be subject to th e joint decision of the
competent authorities pursuant to Article 113 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
605. For parent or subsidiary institutions of a cross-border group, the application of additional
own funds requirements pursuant to Article 104(1)(a) of Directive 2013/36/EU should be
carried out in accordance with the joint decision process provided for in Article 113(1)(a) of
that Directive.
606. In the context of discussions on the adequacy of the level of own funds and determining
additional own funds requirements, competent authorities should consider:

[Page 218]
218
a. the assessment of the materiality of risks and deficiencies identified at both
consolidated and individual entity level (i.e. which risks are material to the group
as a whole and which are material to just one entity) and the level of own funds
required to cover such risks;
b. where deficiencies identified are common across all entities (e.g. same governance
deficiencies present in all entities, or deficiencies in the models used across several
entities), coordinating the assessment and supervisory response, and in particular,
deciding whether measures should be imposed at a consolidated level or
proportionally at entity level for the entities where common deficiencies are
present;
c. outcomes of ICAAP assessments and views on the reliability of ICAAP calculations
and their use as an input in determining additional own funds requirements;
d. outcomes of the supervisory benchmark calculations used to determine additional
own funds requirements for all entities within the group and at a consolidated
level; and
e. additional own funds requirements to be imposed on entities and at a consolidated
level to ensure there is consistency of final own funds requirements and whether
there is a need for transferring own funds from consolidated to entity level.
607. To determine the TSCR as specified in Title 7, competent authorities should consider the
same level of application as the joint decision requirements under Article 113(1)(a) of Directive
2013/36/EU. In particular, the TSCR and other capital measures, if applicable, should be set at
consolidated and solo levels for entities operating in ot her Member States. For the sub -
consolidated level, the TSCR and other capital measures should cover only the parent
undertaking of the sub-consolidated group to avoid double counting of additional own funds
requirements considered by competent authorities for subsidiaries in other Member States.
608. If the outcome of the supervisory assessment of the risk of excessive leverage for the
parent or subsidiary institutions of a cross -border group is that additional own funds
requirements to address the risk of excessive leverage should be set, that should be carried out
in accordance with the joint decision process provided for in Article 113(1)(a) CRD and reflect
the separate stack of own funds requirements based on the leverage ratio.
609. In the context of the discussions on the adequacy of the level of own funds to cover the risk
of excessive leverage and determining additional own funds requirements, competent
authorities should consider:
a. aspects included in paragraph 394;
b. additional own funds requirements to cover the risk of excessive leverage imposed
on entities and at a consolidated level to ensure there is consistency of final own

[Page 219]
219
funds requirements and whether there is a need for transferring own funds from
consolidated to entity level.
610. All the relevant information regarding the determination of P2G (including its size, the
composition of own funds to cover it, and supervisory reactio n) for parent or subsidiary
institutions of a cross -border group should be shared among competent authorities and the
setting of the P2G and P2G -LR should be carried out in accordance with the joint decision
process pursuant to Article 113 (1)(c), of Direct ive 2013/36/EU. In particular, competent
authorities should discuss the approach to establishing P2G at solo level where no data from
the supervisory stress tests is available at solo level, or, where relevant, agree on the
application of P2G at consolidated level only.
611. The P2G and P2G -LR should be subject to joint decision of the competent authorities
pursuant to Article 113(1)(c) of Directive 2013/36/EU and should be duly reflected in the joint
decision document prepared in accordance with Article 113 of Directive 2013/36/EU.
11.3 SREP liquidity assessment and institution-specific prudential
requirements
612. For Article 113(1)(b) of Directive 2013/36/EU, competent authorities should consider
‘matters’ to be significant and/or ‘findings’ to be material at least where:
a. specific quantitative liquidity requirements are proposed by competent
authorities; and/or
b. measures other than specific quantitative liquidity requirements are proposed by
competent authorities and the score assigned to liquidity risk and/or funding risk
is ‘3’ or ‘4’.
11.4 Application of other supervisory measures
613. Competent authorities responsible for the supervision of cross-border groups and their
entities should discuss and coordinate, where possible, application of all supervisory and early
intervention measure s to the group and/or its material entities to ensure that the most
appropriate measures are consistently applied to the identified vulnerabilities , taking into
account the group dimension, including inter -dependencies and intra-group arrangements as
discussed above.
614. Competent authorities responsible for the prudential supervision of entities of a cross -
border group should, when imposing supervisory or administrative measures including
sanctions on institutions for thei r failure to address deficiencies related to ML/TF risks
adequately, liaise with the relevant AML/CFT supervisors in accordance with Section 8 of the

[Page 220]
220
AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines55 and in line with the respective authorities’ mandates and
functions, consider the most appropriate prudential supervisory measures to address these
deficiencies and risks in addition to any measures taken by the AML/CFT supervisors.
55 EBA AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines (EBA/GL/2021/15).

[Page 221]
221
Supervisory stress testing
12.1 Use of supervisory stress testing by competent authorities
615. Competent authorities should, also on the basis of Article 100 of Directive 2013/36/EU, use
supervisory stress testing to facilitate the SREP and, in particular, supervisory assessment of its
key elements, as described in Title 4 to Title 9. In particular, supervisory stress testing should
help competent authorities, where appropriate, with the following:
a. The assessment of institutions’ individual risks to capital as referred to in Title 6, or
risks to liquidity and funding as referred to in Title 8.
b. The assessment of the reliability of institutions’ stress testing programmes, as well
as the relevance, severity and plausibility of scenarios for institutions ’ own stress
tests used for ICAAP and ILAAP purposes. This may include challenging institutions’
main assumptions and risk drivers.
c. The assessment of institutions’ ability to meet TSCR and OCR in the context of the
assessment of capital adequacy, as specified in Section 7.7. Depending on the
coverage and type of the supervisory stress test, this assessment may be limited
only to some elements of TSCR covered by the design features of the supervisory
stress testing (e.g. additional own funds requirements for individual risk categories,
if the stress test covers only such risk categories).
d. The determination of P2G for institutions.
e. The identification of possible vulnerabilities or weaknesses in institutions’ risk
management and controls on individual risk areas.
f. The identification of possible deficiencies in overall governance arrangements or
institution-wide controls: supervisory stress testing should be considered by
competent authorities as an additional source of information for the purposes of
the SREP assessment of internal governance and institution-wide controls referred
to in Title 5. In particular, if a competent authority identifies by means of
supervisory stress testing, deficiencies in the institution’s own stress testing
programmes or supporting risk data infrastructure, these should be taken into
account in the assessment of the overall governance and risk management
framework of that institution.
g. The determination of specific quantitative liquidity requirements in the context of
the assessment of liquidity adequacy, especially where a competent authority has
not developed specific supervisory benchmarks for liquidity requirements. Certain

[Page 222]
222
elements of the liquidity supervisory stress tests should, where appropriate, be
used as inputs when setting specific liquidity requirements for institutions (e.g. a
comparative analysis, under adverse scenarios, of net cash outflows and eligible
liquid assets over a set of time horizons, assessment of stressed maturit y ladder),
as specified in Section 9.4.
616. Furthermore, supervisory stress testing should help competent authorities to assess
supervisory organisational procedures and to plan supervisory resources, considering also
other relevant information, in particular for the more frequent and in -depth assessment of
certain SREP elements in the case of non -Category 1 institutions, and for the purposes of
determining the scope of the supervisory examination programme required by Article 99 of
Directive 2013/36/EU.
617. Competent authorities should also, where appropriate, use the scenarios and outcomes of
supervisory stress tests as additional sources of information in the assessment of institutions’
recovery plans, in particular when assessing the choice and severity of scena rios and
assumptions used by the institution.
618. Competent authorities should also, where appropriate, use supervisory stress testing
outcomes to support the analysis needed for the purposes of granting various permissions and
authorisations required by Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 or Directive 2013/36/EU, for example
in relation to qualifying holdings, mergers and acquisitions, and shares buy-backs.
619. Competent authorities should also use the outcomes of supervisory stress testing, where
appropriate, to support a thematic analysis of the potential vulnerabilities of a group of
institutions with similar risk profiles.
620. Competent authorities should also, where appropriate, use supervisory stress testing as a
way to motivate institutions to enhance their internal stress testing and risk management
capabilities: in particular, a supervisory stress test with a bottom-up component could motivate
institutions to further develop and improve their data aggregation, risk modelling and IT tools
for stress testing and risk management purposes.
12.2 Key elements of supervisory stress testing
621. When deciding on the key elements of supervisory stress testing, competent authorities
should consider, inter alia, the following:
a. Coverage, in terms of covering certain risk factors or multiple risk factors, certain
individual portfolios or activities or sectors/geographies, all or several portfolios.
b. Design, in terms of the following: (1) sensitivity analysis (single -factor or simple
multi-factor), (2) scenario analysis or (3) reverse stress testing. Competent
authorities should choose the design that is most appropriate for the objective
pursued by the stress test: sensitivity analysis to a single risk factor or multiple risk

[Page 223]
223
factors should normally be favoured when assessing individual risk to capital or
risks to liquidity or funding; the scenario analysis approach should normally be
favoured when an assessment of overall capital adequacy is sought; while reverse
stress testing may, inter alia, be deemed appropriate for assessing the severity of
the scenarios used by the institution.
c. Scope, in terms of covering the perimeter of cross-border groups: for the purposes
of the assessment of the overall capital adequacy of the group , competent
authorities should ensure that all relevant group entities are taken into account
stress tests.
d. Sample of institutions covered by the stress tests: when planning supervisory stress
testing for more than one institution, competent authorities should consider the
appropriate sample for the purposes of the exercise, in particular when using
supervisory stress testing for thematic assessments of certain business
lines/models or impact studies/assessments.
e. Approach (top-down stress test, bottom -up stress test, combination of both ,
prescribing specific anchor scenarios for institutions).
622. When designing and conducting supervisory stress tests for SREP purposes, competent
authorities should consider the outcomes of asset quality reviews (AQR), where available ,
appropriate and not already incorporated in to institutions’ financial statements. Combining
supervisory stress testing with AQR s can be considered useful in ensuring that the balance -
sheet positions of the institutions covered by the supervisory stress tests are reported
accurately with improved and comparable starting points across participating institutions.
623. Competent authorities may also consider setting predefined target capital ratios, especially
in the context of system -wide stress tests (including country -level stress tests) , or setting
general or idiosyncratic thresholds. In such cases, th ese must be suitable and by tak e into
account supervisory objectives. Such targets or thresholds should apply consistently to the
institutions within the scope of the supervisory stress tests.
12.3 Organisational and governance arrangements within
competent authorities
624. Competent authorities should establish an effective programm e for supervisory stress
testing. This programme should be supported by appropriate organisation, governance and IT
arrangements ensuring that supervisory stress tests can be conducted with appropriate
frequency. The supervisory stress testing programme sh ould support the effective
implementation of the supervisory examination programme for individual institutions. The
programme should also reflect how the competent authority takes decisions regarding the
choice of forms of supervisory stress testing in clo se connection with the objectives of each
exercise.

[Page 224]
224
625. The governance, organisation and IT arrangements supporting the supervisory stress
testing programme should include at least the following:
a. Sufficient human and material resources, data and I T infrastructure to design and
conduct supervisory stress tests. In particular, the supervisory stress testing
programme should be supported by adequate data and an appropriate
methodological approach covering all aspects, including scenarios and assumptions
(e.g. tem plates, guidance, documentation) , and ensuring both flexibility and
appropriate levels of quality and controls.
b. A quality assurance process covering stress testing design, development and
execution, and the comparability of results across institutions.
c. The integration of supervisory stress testing into other relevant supervisory
processes. Hence , when required and subject to any legal constraints, t he
organisation should support the internal sharing of information and utilisation of
all aspects of the stress testing programme (e.g. both quantitative and qualitative
results).
626. As part of governance arrangement s, competent authorities should ensure that the
supervisory stress testing programme is reviewed regularly, both qualitatively and
quantitatively, to ensure that it is adequate.
627. Competent authorities should ensure that they have processes and arrangements in place
for an effective dialogue with institutions regarding supervisory stress tests and their outcomes.
This dialogue should reflect the intended objectives, be established in particular but not
exclusively when supervisory stress tests are run for the purposes of the assessment of the
overall capital adequacy of institutions and be organised within the more general context of
the SREP assessments as set out in these guidelines. For the purposes of such a dialogue both
at the technical and managerial level, where relevant, the competent authorities should ensure
that:
a. adequate, sufficiently detailed and accurate explanation and guidance is provided
to institutions on the application of the methodologies and assumptions used in a
bottom-up stress test;
b. adequate, sufficiently detailed and accurate instructions are given to institutions
with regard to the supporting information required by them to be submitted to
competent authorities along with the results of the stress tests;
c. explanation is provided to institutions following discussions, where relevant, of the
outcomes of supervisory stress tests that lead to the application of supervisor y
measures. This should be considered by competent authorities in particular in the
context of system-wide stress tests that trigger supervisory measures.

[Page 225]
225
628. When applying supervisory stress testing to cross -border groups and their entities,
competent author ities should exchange information and, where practically possible,
appropriately discuss the process within the framework of colleges of supervisors. In particular,
competent authorities should ensure that relevant details on the methodologies, scenarios and
major assumptions as well as the results of supervisory stress test s, especially those aimed at
assessing capital or liquidity adequacy, are made available and discussed.
629. Competent authorities should also identify what information regarding supervisory stress
tests and their outcomes may be publicly disclosed, taking into account the intended purposes
of the supervisory stress tests. When deciding on the public disclosure of the results or
methodologies of supervisory stress tests, competent authorities should consider their own
role in the exercise and the approach chosen (top-down stress test, bottom-up stress test) and
also consider the extent of their own analysis to accompany published results.
12.4 Process and methodological considerations
630. The super visory stress testing programme set out by the competent authorities should
ensure at least the following:
a. When designing methodologies and assumptions for use in supervisory stress tests,
competent authorities should decide on the design and features of the exercise
that are most suitable for its intended purpose, i.e. that are linked to the
supervisory (or other) objectives set by the competent authority.
b. When con ducting supervisory stress tests on a wider sample of institutions,
competent authorities may consider adopting the design of supervisory stress tests
for different categories of institutions as set out in Section 2.4, especially if the
exercise is top-down.
c. Competent authorities should consider the appropriate timelines for conducting
supervisory stress tests, including the time horizon of the scenarios and the period
over which the management actions proposed by institutions in the stress test
exercise ar e analysed. The timelines for the exercise should also factor in the
dialogue with the institution, where relevant for the intended purpose of the
exercise and the extent to which the data supplied by the participating institution
will remain relevant.
d. Competent authorities should consider, where relevant for the intended purpose
of the exercise, all known future regulatory changes affecting institutions within
the scope and time horizon of the exercise.
631. In the case of a scenario analysis stress test, competent authorities should decide whether
to run a single scenario to be applied to all institutions included in the scope of the exercise, or
to develop institution-specific scenarios for individual institutions (the latter should not be seen

[Page 226]
226
as relieving institutions from the responsibility of designing own scenarios for the purposes of
ICAAP and ILAAP stress testing), or a combination of the two. Competent authorities should
consider the transferability of capital and liquidity resources in stressed cond itions and any
possible impediments, including legal and operational impediments, that may exist.
632. Furthermore, the following aspects should be considered when developing the
methodologies for supervisory stress tests:
a. For the purposes of the assessment of capital adequacy, competent authorities
should consider the impact of the stress test on the institution ’s P&L, balance
sheet, risk exposure amount and leverage ratio, and analyse the impact of the
stress test on the capital ratios of institutions covered by the exercise.
b. For the purposes of bottom-up stress tests, competent authorities should consider
the extent to which they prescribe the methodologies for modelling institutions’
balance sheets and P&L. Indicatively, institutions’ balance sheets may be taken as
static, allowing competent authorities to assess current risks over time.
Alternatively, they may be allowed to be dynamic, permitting, for example, a more
forward-looking exploration of how institutions’ business plans might evolve under
the stress scenario or how credit volumes might evolve over time. For enhanced
comparability, competent authorities may consider opting for the static balance
sheet approach. Conversely, for enhanced feedback on institutions’ intended or
planned reactions vis -a-vis stresses and shocks, the dynamic balance sheet
approach may be favoured.
c. Competent authorities should consider how to take account of systemic feedback
or second -round effects in the stress tests , where relevant, recognising the
limitations of providing ex ante assumptions in the case of bottom-up stress tests.
d. For the purposes of bottom -up supervisory stress tests , competent authorities
should aim to assess the impact of such exercises consistently and fairly across the
institutions covered by supervisory stress tests, respecting the level playing field.
Competent authorities should also consider the extent to which stress test results
reflect differences in modelling choices and judgements among institutions, rather
than true differences in the risks to which they are exposed.
633. Competent authorities should aim to assess model risk across stress testing exercises and
have access to different types of comparative information. It is recommended to have, where
appropriate, several perspectives/benchmarks. It is important to recognise that all models are
imperfect and to clearly identify known and potential weaknesses. Understanding t hese
limitations and weaknesses of individual institutions’ stress testing models can inform the
supervisory stress testing process and mitigate potential problems arising from model risk.

[Page 227]
227
Annexes
Annex 1. Operational risk, examples of the link between losses and
risk drivers
To illustrate how operational risk manifests itself, it is necessary to understand the relationship
between the drivers of a specific risk event and the impact (i.e. outcome) of the risk event. Some
examples are given in the following table56.
56 Root cause gives rise to a risk event resulting in an impact or multiple outcomes, some of which are quantifiable.
Driver Risk event
Impact types
(outcomes)
People
Arson – a deliberate
act committed by a
person
Fire – the event • Death/injury
• Financial loss/cost
• Property damage
• Customer disruption
Process Manual error Inaccurate accounts • Financial loss
• Reworking accounts
Systems
IT software fault ATMs shut
down/unavailable
• Customer complaints
• Compensation
• Reputational damage
• Regulatory censure
External
Very severe ice storm Buildings
inaccessible/invocation of
contingency
arrangements
• Customer disruption
• Financial loss
• Repair costs

[Page 228]
228
Annex 2. Key features and differences between P2R and P2G
P2R P2G
Nature
Requirement on top of Pillar 1 and below
the combined buffer requirement set in
accordance with Article 104 of the CRD
Expectation on top of the combined
buffer requirement
Scope
(1) Risk of unexpected losses over 12-
months period not covered by minimum
requirements; (2) risk of expected losses
over 12 months insufficiently covered by
provisions; (3) risk of underestimation of
risk due to model deficiencies; (4) risks
arising from governance deficiencies
Quantitative outcomes of relevant
stress tests (other potential areas to
be explored further)
Determination
Calculation takes into account ICAAP
figures, where assessed as reliable,
supported by , for example, supervisory
benchmarks applied in relation to ICAAP
calculations, supervisory judg ement,
etc.
Calculation based on the maximum
impact of the adverse scenario on
the CET1 ratio, adjusted, for
example, for credible mitigating
actions and other factors, and offset
against the own funds held to meet
the CCB and in exceptional cases the
CCyB if it covers the same risks
assumed in the stress test
Quality of
capital
Regulatory eligible own funds, at least in
the same composition as Pillar 1 [CET1 only]
Relevance for
the restrictions
on distributions
under Article
141 of Directive
2013/36/EU
Yes No
Communication
to institution
Part of the TSCR ratio articulated in
relation to all Pillar 1 ratios (total own
funds, T1, CET1)
As a separate ratio, not part of TSCR
or OCR, explaining how it affects all
capital ratios (T1 and total own
funds)

[Page 229]
229
Compliance Requirements to be met at all times,
including in stressed conditions
Institutions are expected to
incorporate P2G into their capital
planning, risk management and
recovery planning , and operate
above P2G
Supervisory
response to
breaches
All supervisory measures can be applied;
a breach is a potential condition for the
withdrawal of authorisation ; an
institution in breach is considered failing
or likely to fail for resolution purposes
No automatic link between the level
of own funds falling below P2G a nd
specific supervisory measures , but
would trigger enhanced supervisory
dialogue and engagement with an
institution, as there is a need to
provide a credible capital plan

[Page 230]
230
Accompanying documents
1.1 Draft cost-benefit analysis / impact assessment
I. Introduction
The Directive amending the Capital Requirements Directive (CRD 5) entered into force on 27 June
2019 and became applicable on 29 December 2020 with the exception of some provisions.
According to the EBA risk reduction package roadma ps 57 , the EBA should amend the SREP
guidelines in order to be aligned to the new changes introduced in the Pillar 2 framework. The
changes introduced by CRD V include: (i) the incorporation of elements related to ML/TF risks ; (ii)
more detailed clarifications on the conditions for setting the Pillar 2 capital add-ons and the quality
of required capital; (iii) the introduction of capital add-ons for the risk of excessive leverage; (iv) the
microprudential perspective of Pillar 2 capital add -ons in order to avoid overlaps with
macroprudential tools; (v) the inclusion of the Pillar 2 guidance as part of the joint decision on
institution-specific prudential requirements; and (vi) the mandate to consider inclusion of ESG risks.
Lastly, the framework for the interest rate risk in the non-trading book (IRRBB) is modified with the
introduction of the credit spread risk in the banking book (CSRBB), a common and simplified
standardised approach for IRRBB and the inclusion of the net inter est income (NII) perspective to
the economic value of equity (EVE) for the purposes of interest rate risk management, disclosures
and prudential supervision. In addition, proportionality provisions applicable to small and non -
complex institutions and to large institutions were introduced in the revised Capital Requirements
Regulation (CRR 2). This regulatory classification should also be reflected in the application of the
proportionality principle in the SREP.
In order to incorporate the relevant CRD V / C RR 2 provisions into the already existing set of
guidelines that set the basis of the day -to-day work of supervisors, a second revision of the SREP
guidelines was undertaken.
II. Policy objectives
The scope of the second revision of the SREP guidelines is focu sed on the incorporation of the
elements related to proportionality, guidance on how to take into account ML/TF risks in the SREP,
the incorporation of the microprudential perspective of Pillar 2, the clarification for setting Pillar 2
capital add-ons and the alignment of Pillar 2 guidance to the new CRD V provisions. Other elements,
57 https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/document_library//EBA%20Risk%20Reduction%20Packag
e%20Roadmaps.docx.pdf

[Page 231]
231
related to the inclusion of ESG risks into the SREP and the review of the supervisory assessment of
IRRBB management and controls will take place in a further review of the SREP guidelines.
The elements related to ML/TF risks that have been incorporated into the guidelines are fully
aligned with the Opinion on how to take into account ML/TF risks in the Supervisory Review and
Evaluation Process, published in November 202058.
III. Baseline scenario
The common EU SREP framework has been applied since 2016, with the first version of the
guidelines first published in December 2014 and that entered into force in January 2016. The
version of the guidelines that is currently applicable is the Revised EBA Guidelines on common
procedures and methodology for the supervisory review and evaluation process and supervisory
stress testing59, which was the result of a first review of the SREP guidelines undertaken in 2018.
This first revision introduced P2G, integrated supervisory stress tests, detailed supervisory
assessment of banks’ stress testing, clarified certain aspects of the scoring framework, introduced
a better explanation of the interaction between the SREP elements and the articulation of the total
SREP capital requirements (TSCR) and overall capital requirements (OCR), among others.
IV. Options considered
The following policy options were assessed during the drafting process in order to make the SREP
guidelines aligned with CRD V provisions.
Minimum engagement model: categorisation review
In CRR 2, a definition of ‘small and non -complex institutions’ is introduced in order to make
disclosure and prudential requirements simpler and more conservative for these institutions. For
this, the following options were assessed in order to apply propo rtionality principle into the SREP
guidelines.
Option 1: Maintain current categorisation
Under the current SREP Guidelines, competent authorities should classify all institutions under their
supervisory remit into four categories according to their size, structure and internal organi sation,
and according to the nature, scope and complexity of their activities, as well as the level of systemic
risk. The difference between the categories translates into different minimum frequency of the
assessment of all the SREP elements, which is set on an annual basis for Category 1, every 2 years
58 https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/document_library/Publications/Opinions/2020/935606/O
pinion%20on%20how%20to%20take%20into%20account%20MLTF%20risks%20in%20SREP.pdf
59 https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/documents/10180/2282666/6c2e3962-6b95-4753-a7dc-
68070a5ba662/Revised%20Guidelines%20on%20SREP%20%28EBA-GL-2018-03%29.pdf

[Page 232]
232
for Category 2 and every 3 years for Categories 3 and 4. Therefore, under the current framework,
there is almost no difference in treatment between Categories 3 and 4.
Option 2: Adapt the categorisation to the proportionality provisions introduced in CRD V
This option ensures that the definition of small and non-complex institutions is reflected in the SREP
categorisation and a more detailed guidance in that regard is provided, allowing better
differentiation between the SREP Categories 3 and 4. With additional flexib ility granted to the
supervisor in allocation of institutions to categories, this option c reates a possibility to better
allocate supervisory resources.
This option will create more differentiation between the categories applicable to small institutions
(3 and 4), reducing the burden for those small and non -complex institutions that could be
reclassified from Category 3 to Category 4. Category 4 will be the one with the lowest engagement
frequency, which ensures appropriate application of the proportionality principle.
Option 2 is the preferred option.
Methodology of setting additional own funds requirements (P2R)
Option 1: Further clarifications on a risk-by-risk approach
This option implements Article 104a of CRD V into the SREP guidelines, including clarification that
the process for setting additional own funds requirements should be divided into two steps: (a) the
determination of the capital considered adequate by the competent authority ; (b) the
determination of additional own funds requirements by deducting the relevant Pillar 1 requirement
from the capital considered adequate. Thus, Pillar 1 requirements is the floor for the calculation of
Pillar 2. Further clarifications on the application of this approach on a risk-by risk basis allow greater
consistency of supervisory approaches and level playing field for EU institutions.
Option 2: Current approach
Under this option, the current guidance would rem ain largely unchanged, apart from clarific ation
that the risks considered should be institution-specific (i.e. systemic risk would be eliminated from
the scope of Pillar 2 add -ons, in line with CRD V). This option ensures flexibility to competent
authorities and promotes continuation of current practices, but may also reinforce inconsistencies
among supervisory practices, affecting level playing field for institutions.
Option 1 is the preferred option.
Role of ICAAP in the methodology for setting P2R
Option 1: ICAAP calculations are the starting point for P2R determination (current
approach).

[Page 233]
233
The current approach set in the guidelines set the ICAAP as the starting point for the P2R
determination, supplemented by other relevant inputs. However, accordi ng to the CRD, ICAAP
should be taken into account, which means that there is the possibility of considering other possible
sources of information at the same level of importance as ICAAP for the purposes of P2R (i.e.
supervisory reporting and benchmark calculations and other relevant inputs). While this approach
puts particular emphasis on the use of ICAAP and encourages institutions to improve its quality for
the purpose of internal risk management, it may not be appropriate to apply it in cases where the
ICAAP calculations are not sufficiently reliable. Furthermore, given different methodologies used
by institutions as well as different levels of conservatism, this approach may pose a challenge in
ensuring overall comparability of the outcomes between institutions.
Option 2: ICAAP used for identification and assessment of risks and, if reliable, considered
for the quantification of P2R
Under this option, it is recogn ised that ICAAP carries a lot of valuable information, not only in the
form of calculations of economic capital, but also the qualitative information related to risk
management. Therefore, even in cases where ICAAP calculations are not sufficiently reliable, the
qualitative information is a valuable input for identification and assessment of risk s. For the
purpose of the P2R quantification ICAAP calculations should be taken into account only if they are
reliable, together with other sources of information, such as benchmark calculations and other
relevant inputs. This option will still keep ICAAP as the most prominent source of information for
SREP purposes, while ensuring compliance with CRD V and recognising the need to consider other
relevant inputs.
Option 2 is the preferred option.
Methodology of setting P2G
Option 1: Bucketing approach
This p roposed methodology maintains the main policy choices of the 2018 revision in order to
calculate P2G: (i) usage of the adverse scenario of stress tests ; (ii) consideration of the worst year
of the scenario ; (iii) the offsetting of P2G against elements of t he combined capital buffer with
potential overlap (i.e. Capital Conservation Buffer); and (iv) P2G should meet with CET1 capital. As
the novelty in the proposed methodology institutions would be classified into buckets of capital
depletion under the maximum stress test impact, calculated based on the changes in the CET1 ratio
and the TREA in the worst year of stress under the adverse scenario of the relevant stress test. The
buckets would be defined on an absolute basis in order to be institution -specific as prescribed by
Article 104b of CRD. Under this methodology, the P2G starting point would be the result of th e
difference between the stress test maximum depletion under the adverse scenario and elements
of overlapping (i.e. 2.5% of Capital Conservation Buffer, other adjustments like the Static Balance
Sheet Assumption, etc.). This option would ensure the level p laying field in the EU by the
harmonisation of the P2G methodology. At the same time, the possibility to apply additional
adjustments in line with the guidance provided allows flexibility to address specific situations.

[Page 234]
234
Option 2: Current approach
The current approach, in which flexibility is granted to competent authorities, would be maintained.
Therefore, different methodologies for the calculation of P2G would remain in place across the EU,
not all of them based on the results of the adverse scenario of t he stress test. This heterogeneity
brings a high level of dispersion in the final outcomes of P2G and poses a risk for the level playing
field across the EU.
Option 1 is the preferred option.
Quality of capital to cover P2G-LR
To enhance supervisory convergence and level playing field between institutions, the SREP
Guidelines specify the quality of capital competent authorities should require institutions to hold
to meet P2G-LR.
Option 1: Coverage of P2G-LR using CET1 capital
P2G-LR is set to cover potential losses revealed by supervisory stress scenarios, and ultimately aims
at allowing an institution to meet its TSLRR under stress conditions. Using CET1 capital to cover
P2G-LR ensures a timely and efficient loss absorption capacity. Moreo ver, under such an option,
the quality of capital to cover P2G -LR will mirror the quality of capital to cover P2G ensuring
consistency between such requirements.
Option 2: Coverage of P2G-LR using Tier 1 capital
The leverage ratio overall capital requirements, including the leverage ratio G -SII buffer, shall be
covered using Tier 1 capital. Under this option, the coverage of P2G -LR is aligned with such
requirements, easing competent au thorities’ monitoring of the leverage ratio -based capital
requirements. Moreover, Article 104b of the CRD does not prescribe any capital quality to cover
P2G-LR, requiring only an appropriate level ‘own funds’ in light of their loss-absorption capabilities
under stress conditions. Based on the current legal framework ( notably the CRR and the EBA RTS
on own funds), reinforced by the EBA work on the monitoring of capital instruments strengthening
the consistency and quality of such instruments, AT1 capital is therefore considered of sufficient
quality to timely and effectively absorb losses under stress conditions.
Option 2 is the preferred option.
Incorporation of ML/TF risks in the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process

[Page 235]
235
In view of Article 97(6) of CRD V and further to the action plan on AML adopted by the Council of
the European Union60, the EBA needs to provide common guidance on how to assess ML/TF risks
in prudential supervisory activities and in the context of the supervisory review and evaluation
process. In view of the urgency to provide advice on this topic, the EBA published an O pinion on
how to take into account ML/TF risks in the SREP 61. The opinion provides advice at a high level on
the subject in anticipation of the more detailed common guidance included in the revised SREP
Guidelines. Therefore, the policy options described below were already set out in the opinion.
Approach
Option 1: Include the guidance on the prudential treatment of ML/TF risks and concerns in
a separate section of the SREP Guidelines
Under this option, the treatment of ML/TF risks in the SREP process would form part of a different
title of the guidelines, separated from other titles included (i.e. business model, internal
governance, capital and liquidity and funding) and treated as a separate SREP component. This
approach would not be fully aligned with CRD V, because from the paragraph added into Article 97
(amending Directive 2013/36/EU) it is inferred that the ML/TF risk is expected to be assessed within
the other areas (in particular the evaluation of the governance arrangements, the business model
or the activities of an institution). The paragraph introduced an explicit requirement for prudential
supervisors to immediately notify the EBA and the AML/CFT supervisor of the institution where a
review gives reasonable grounds to suspect that, in connection with that institution, money
laundering or terrorist financing is being or has been committed or attempted, or there is increased
risk thereof.
Therefore, this option would add clarity about how to assess ML/TF risks from a prudential
perspective (as all the elements to be assessed would be part of a separate section), but there could
be duplication with other areas already covered in the SREP process (business model, internal
governance and controls, etc.) as the ML/TF weaknesses are closely related to th ose areas. This
could lead to overlaps in the overall assessment.
Option 2: Adopt an integrated approach
This option embeds the prudential treatment of ML/TF risks in the relevant sections of other areas
to which it relates (such as internal governance, operational risk, business model analysis, etc.). As
ML/TF risks are related to other areas included in relevant sections of the SREP guidelines, it would
only be necessary to update the relevant sections with specific guidance of how to incorporate
ML/TF risks. Moreover, this option is aligned with current supervisory practices, as pointed out by
several authorities during the drafting process. Therefore, this option would not represent a
60 https://www.consilium.europa.eu/media/37283/st15164-en18.pdf
61 https://www.eba.europa.eu/sites/default/documents/files/document_library/Publications/Opinions/2020/935606/O
pinion%20on%20how%20to%20take%20into%20account%20MLTF%20risks%20in%20SREP.pdf

[Page 236]
236
significant change in the SREP guidelines (as only updates on relevant sections would be needed)
and would be aligned to current practices.
The adoption of an integrated approach to the inclusion of ML/TF risks in the SREP is in line with
Article 97 of Directive 2013/36/EU, and reflects the delineation of the respective roles of competent
authorities and AML/CFT supervisors.
Option 2 is the preferred option.
Scoring
Regarding the process of assigning scores to assess the level of ML/TF risk, two options were
considered, that ML/TF risks and concerns should either form part of a separate risk score or they
should be considered within the scores of the risk to which ML/TF risk is related.
Option 1: Separate scoring for ML/TF risk
Under this option, ML/TF risk would be scored separately from the other risks. In order to build the
scores, the supervisory considerations on the risk would be closely related to the other areas
involved in which ML/TF has been identified (i.e. internal governance, operational risk, etc.).
Moreover, this policy decision is closely related to the integra ted approach assessed above. Thus,
as it was decided to opt for an integrated approach in order to assess ML/TF risks under the SREP
(instead of creating a separated section or the SREP component for ML/TF risk), the scoring should
not be misaligned with this choice and thus the scores are related to the current existing titles of
the guidelines.
Option 2: Embed ML/TF risk into the scores for the other risks
Under this option and the assessment related to ML/TF risk would serve as a relevant input to the
scores of the relevant related areas. For example, as ML/TF concerns related to the credit granting
process and origin of funds to repay are considered within Title 6 of assessing risks to capital, the
assessment of prudential supervisor on this specific topic should feed the score of risks to capital.
This option is more aligned with the integrated approach selected in order to review the SREP
guidelines and would avoid creating overlaps with the other risk scores. The option not to create a
separate ML/TF risk score also reflects the delineation of the respective roles of competent
authorities and AML/CFT supervisors.
Option 2 is the preferred option.
Sources of information
Option 1: Prudential warning signals that may alert an increased exposure to ML/TF risks
be included in the monitoring of key indicators for the SREP

[Page 237]
237
Under this option, the incorporation of ML/TF risks into the SREP would be based solely on
information related and obtained from prudential reporting. This option would be sufficient for
Title 3 (monitoring of key indicators), in order to build quantitative indicators based on prudential
reporting. However, for the rest of the areas (business models, internal governance and controls),
the input from AML/CFT supervisors related to findings from their assessments and material
weaknesses in AML/CFT controls, would be key to ensur ing that the prudential supervisor is
considering all the information available that c ould be useful to relate these material weaknesses
to risks that could lead to prudential shortcomings.
Option 2: Information based on prudential indicators to identify ML/TF risk and information
obtained from AML/CFT supervisors
Under this option, prudent ial supervisors will also consider the outcomes of the assessments
conducted by AML/CFT competent authorities into the SREP assessment of business models,
operational risk, credit risk, liquidity and funding and internal governance and institution -wide
controls as an additional source of information. AML/CFT competent authorities have the expertise
and legal mandate62 to supervise whether and how effectively the ML/TF risk is managed within a
credit institution and to assess to which ML/TF risks is the credit institution exposed.
Therefore, the option to cooperate with AML/CFT competent authorities is the preferred option as
prudential supervisors could obtain from them relevant outcomes from their supervisory activities
(e.g. findings from inspections) or outcomes of their monitoring of ML/TF risks.
Option 2 is the preferred option.
V. Impact assessment (data collection)
In order to assess the impact of the revision of the guidelines, a survey has been addressed to EU
competent authorities. The submitted data is composed by 192 banks that are under the direct
supervision of 27 national competent authorities and represent 5 8% of European banking sector’
assets. The sample is heterogeneous, composed by 81 systemic banks, 40 medium sized banks and
79 institutions with consolidated assets below EUR 5 bn (of which 8 of them are considered
systemic). In terms of the SREP categorisation, the sample is also heterogeneous, composed of 92
banks classified in the SREP Category 1, 33 banks classified in the SREP Category 2, 41 banks
classified in the SREP Category 3 and 18 banks classified in the SREP Category 4. The data refers to
the SREP categorisation and applicable levels of P2R and P2G as of December 2020.
Proportionality
Data has also been requested for institutions with consolidated assets below EUR 5 bn, which would
be eligible from a quantitative perspective as ‘small and non -complex institutions’. Among the 79
institutions of the sample that account with consolidated a ssets below EUR 5 bn as of December
62 Under Article 48(1) of AMLD, AML/CFT competent authorities are tasked with effectively monitoring the compliance
of credit institutions with those requirements.

[Page 238]
238
2020, 71 of them have their SREP categorisation informed. Of these, 70% are classified in categories
1 to 3, with Category 3 appearing as the most predominant. Therefore, these institutions, which
would be mainly classified in Category 4 will benefit from a more proportionate approach for Pillar
2 purposes and thus the purpose of the proportionality provisions introduced into the guidelines
would be fulfilled, and consistency would be ensured in the scope of the applicati on of
proportionality for the small and non-complex institutions across the different Pillars.
Figure 8: SREP categorisation of small and non-complex institutions, December 2020 data
Sources: EBA calculations based on the results of the data collection.
P2R methodology
Under the CRD V, P2R will not only cover risks excluded or not explicitly addressed in Pillar 1, but
also risks underestimated in Pillar 1. Pillar 1 acts as a floor for the own funds requirements for a
given risk. In the survey, most jurisdictions (24 out of 27 respondents) stated that their
methodology to obtain P2R considers risks underestimated in Pillar 1. The rest (3 out of 26) use P2R
to cover risks not adequately captured in Pillar 1: one uses P2R to c over only IRRBB, other covers
IRRBB and concentration risk and other covers maturity risk, risk weight floor for corporate
exposures and risk weight floor for exposures covered by commercial real estate. Among the 24
jurisdictions that cover Pillar 1 risks with P2R, 23 of them also use P2R to cover risks excluded or
not explicitly addressed in the Pillar 1 framework. Therefore, most jurisdictions (23 out of 27) are
aligned with the methodology for setting P2R of considering Pillar 1 risks and additional ris ks not
addressed in Pillar 1 and they set the Pillar 1 floor on a risk -by-risk basis. Thus, the cost of
implementing this methodology in the EU banking sector is moderate.
Chart 2 shows the number of banks that account with P2R add-ons of each of the risks considered.
More than half of the banks of the sample account with add -ons related to Pillar 1 risks (credit,
10
18
27
16
8
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
1 2 3 4 Not classified
Categorization of small and non-complex
institutions

[Page 239]
239
market and operational risk) and add -ons related to risks not captured by Pillar 1 (IRRBB and
concentration risk). Thus, this is another evidenc e about the high level of implementation of the
risk-by-risk approach for obtaining the total level of P2R, considering Pillar 1 and Pillar 2 risks.
Figure 9: Number of banks per P2R add-on applied for each risk, December 2020 data
Sources: EBA calculations based on the results of the data collection.
The survey also included cells that permitted competent authorities to discretionarily submit other
risks considered for P2R (see Chart 3). For example, some banks account with a P2R on risks not
explicitly addressed in Pillar 1 (foreign currency risk of credit portfolios) and on other risks not fully
captured in Pillar 1 (reputational, strategic risk, AML). Lastly, another 3 banks have P2R on systemic
risk, which would not be fully compliant with the provision of CRD V to apply P2R on an institution-
specific basis.
140
137
131
113107
107
70
42
40
39
38
37 37
Credit and counterparty risk
IRRBB
Operational risk
Business model (viability and sustainability)
Internal governance/internal control
Market risk
Concentration risk
Risk to liquidity
Capital adequacy
Funding risk
Settlement risk
Liquidity adequacy
Risk of excessive leverage

[Page 240]
240
Figure 10: P2R add-ons by additional risks considered by competent authorities, number of banks
per add-on, December 2020 data
Sources: EBA calculations based on the results of the data collection.
Quality of capital to meet P2R
The composition of additional own funds requirements was clarified further in paragraph 389 of
the revised version of the guidelines to incorporate the requirement of Article 104a(4) of CRD V.
Around 45% of the banks of the sample are above the minimum requirement of 56.25% of Common
Equity Tier 1 (CET 1). Among the rest, half of the sample are slightly below the requirement but five
outlier banks are far from the minimum requirement. Therefore, the impact of complying with the
composition of P2R is medium, given the fact that more than half of the sample is currently below
the minimum.
12
11
7
5
5
4
3
3
3 1 Reputational risk
FX lending risk
Strategic risk
AML risk
Other risks
Pension risk
Systemic Risk
Residual risk
Risks associated with outsourced activities
Sovereign risk

[Page 241]
241
Figure 11: P2R covered with CET1 capital, distribution of banks in each bucket of coverage,
December 2020 data
Sources: EBA calculations based on the results of the data collection. Num ber of banks in each interval of proportion of P2R covered
with CET 1 capital.
P2G methodology
P2G is included in Article 104b of CRD V and competent authorities should develop their
methodology to apply P2G to the institutions under their direct supervision. Out of the 27
respondents, 7 competent authorities do not apply P2G yet to the institutions supervised by them,
3 competent authorities do not apply P2G based on stress test results and 7 competent authorities
apply either caps or floors in the P2G calculation (i.e. not purely an institution -specific calculation
as prescribed in CRD V). Thus, mo re than half of the competent authorities (17 out of 27) would
need modifications in their P2G methodology. The impact of this is expected to be medium.
The methodologies used are divergent. For example, one competent authority uses a bucketing
methodology according to the CET 1 depletion in the adverse scenario, other calculates P2G as a
difference between capital depletion plus a hurdle rate and the sum of Pillar 1, Pillar 2 and capital
conservation buffer and another uses ICAAP parameters on a risk -by-risk basis. This divergence is
translated in a high deviation in P2G across countries, as can be observed in Chart 4, which has been
obtained for each country that account with at least two banks with positive P2G value.

[Page 242]
242
Figure 12: P2G communicated to the banks, December 2020 data
Sources: EBA calculations based on the results of the data collection. Weighted average (by consolidated assets) considering competent
authorities with at least 2 banks with positive P2G value, two competent authorities with only one bank with positive P2G were excluded
from the calculations.
Among the competent authorities that calculate P2G based on stress test result without applying
caps or floor in the calculation, the final P2G applied shows a high correlation with the depletion of
the adverse scenario of the stress test. However, this only occurs for less than half of the banks of
the sample (86 banks from 17 countries), which represents a significant proportion of the banks of
the sample with pos itive P2G value (103 banks from 20 countries). Therefore, the majority of
competent authorities that apply positive values of P2G are using methodologies based on ST
results. However, a few jurisdictions that currently do not apply P2G based on stress test results or
do not have any methodology to set P2G would need to align their methodologies to incorporate
P2G and to amend their P2G methodology in order to consider the adverse scenario of the stress
test without caps and floors.
0%
1%
1%
2%
2%
3%
Ctry 1
Ctry 2
Ctry 3
Ctry 4
Ctry 5
Ctry 6
Ctry 7
Ctry 8
Ctry 9
Ctry 10
Ctry 11
Ctry 12
Ctry 13
Ctry 14
Ctry 15
Ctry 16
Ctry 17
Ctry 18
Ctry 19
P2G communicated to the banks

[Page 243]
243
Figure 13: Correlation between the stress test depletion under the adverse scenario and the final
P2G communicated to banks
Sources: EBA calculations based on the results of the data collection.
R² = 0.5902
0%
5%
10%
15%
20%
25%
30%
0% 5% 10% 15% 20% 25% 30% 35%
Final P2G communicated to banks
ST depletion under the adverse scenario

[Page 244]
244
1.2 Feedback on the public consultation and on the opinion of
the BSG
The EBA publicly consulted on the draft proposal contained in this paper.
The consultation period lasted for 3 months and ended on 28 September 2021. Eight responses
were received, of which 7 were published on the EBA website.
This paper presents a summary of the key points and other comments arising from the consultation,
the analysis and discussion triggered by these comments and the actions taken to address them if
deemed necessary.
In many cases several industr y bodies made similar comments or the same body repeated its
comments in the response to different questions. In such cases, the comments and EBA analysis
are included in the section of this paper where EBA considers them most appropriate.
Changes to the draft Guidelines have been incorporated as a result of the responses received during
the public consultation.
Summary of key issues and the EBA’s response
The comments received by the EBA touched upon a broad range of areas addressed in the
guidelines and more specifically: categorisation of the credit institutions, business model analysis,
assessment of the internal governance and institution-wide controls, assessment of risks to capital,
assessment of risks to liquidity and funding risk, assessment of the risk of excessive leverage,
calculation of additional own funds requirements and the P2G, as well as application of supervisory
measures. Other comments were specifically targeting the proposed provisions related to the
incorporation of ML/TF risks in the SREP.
The respondents raised a number of comments of a more general nature. These included in
particular the opportunity to introduce further proportionality and simplification in the text of the
guidelines, arguing that more clarity is needed with regard to the practical application of the general
principle of proportionality reflected in the guidelines. Furthermore, many respondents raised the
issue of the role of the ICAAP in the assessment of capital adequacy and the setting of P2R and P2G,
advocating s tronger incorporation of the ICAAP information and estimates in to the overall
framework for setting additional own funds requirements. One of the most commented areas was
the assessment of the risk of excessive leverage and the related additional own funds requirements
and guidance (P2R-LR and P2G-LR). Given the novelty of these requirements, several respondents
expressed concerns about the application of the proposed guidance and appropriate calibration of
the P2R-LR and P2G-LR.
The EBA has taken into account the response received from the Banking Stakeholder Group (BSG).

[Page 245]
245
The BSG encouraged the EBA to further reflect the principle of proportionality throughout the text
of the guidelines, it pointed out the need to take into account the SPE/MPE organisational structure
in the context of the assessment of the internal governa nce and stressed the importance of
addressing ICT as a separate source of risk. The objective of enhanced transparency was welcomed
by the BSG, and also in the context of the communication and justification of additional own funds
requirements to instituti ons. Finally, the BSG indicated it shared the view of the EBA that there
should be complementarity between supervisory authorities and encouraged the EBA to keep
working on the proposed line to ensure fluent coordination without creating an overwhelming flow
of demands to institutions.

[Page 246]
246
Summary of responses to the consultation and EBA’s analysis
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
General comments
Date of application
Some respondents asked the EBA about the
planned date of application of the Guidelines. They
pointed out that as the GL are unlikely to be
finalised and the translations made available until
the beginning of 2022, the GL should not enter into
force until 1 January 2023.
In line with the comments the date of application is
set as 1 January 2023. However, competent
authorities are encouraged to introduce these revised
provisions to the extent possible already in the 2022
SREP cycle, especially taking into account the national
transposition of CRD V.
Paragraph 14
amended.
MPE/SPE organi sational
models
Some respondents suggested that the text of the GL
should explicitly recogn ise the difference between
MPE (multiple point of entry) and SPE (single point
of entry) organi sational models. More specifically,
the respondents claimed that supervisors should
appropriately consider in their assessment that
MPE models imply a decentral ised management of
capital and liquidity (thus their organi sational
structure envisages the presence of different
subsidiaries) whereas SPE models entail centralised
management.
In the opinion of the respondents, the areas
covered by the supervisory assessment where these
different organisational models have an impact are
those related to liquidity and business model. In the
case of liquidity, for instance, the respondents
argued that directly comparing banks having an
MPE with those having an SPE model might b e
inaccurate and thus lead to incorrect conclusions.
Similarly, for business model analysis it was claimed
In accordance with the requirements laid out in
Directive 2013/36/EU, the SREP is carried out in
principle at the solo and the consolidated level. When
performing the assessment at the consolidated level,
competent authorities should take into account the
structure of the group and the relations between
specific entities of the group. Already in the
preliminary assessment of the business model
competent authorities should take into account,
among others, any major geographies, subsidiaries,
branches and bus iness lines. These aspects are then
further explored in the qualitative and quantitative
analysis of the business model.
The terminology of SPE/MPE is used in the context of
resolution strategies. However, different resolution
tools or combinations thereof may be applied in cases
of bank failures (e.g. sale of business, asset separation
and bail-in). Therefore, this is addre ssed in the SREP
GL in a more general manner, by the requirement that
in conducting the business model analysis competent
New paragraph 419
and additional
clarifications in
paragraphs 76(e)
and 536 (g) and (h).

[Page 247]
247
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
that the independence among subsidiaries (for
banks having an MPE model) should be taken into
account when performing the supervisory
assessment.
authorities should take into account the recovery and
resolution plans.
The level of application of the SREP is clarified in
Section 1.3 of the guidelines. In the specific context of
liquidity, it is already recognised that ‘when an
institution has established a liquidity sub -group
pursuant to Article 8 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013,
competent authorities should conduct their
assessment of risks to liquidity and funding, and apply
supervisory measures, for the entities covered by
such subgroup at the level of the liquidity sub-group’.
Therefore, no further changes are considered
necessary in the Guidelines to specifically reflect
MPE/SPE organisational models. However, some
additional clarifications are introduced in the context
of the use of recovery and resolution plans as a source
of information for the SREP, and the cooperation with
resolution authorities.
AML/CFT related comments
Definition of money laundering
and terrorist financing
One respondent suggested to amend the definition
of money laundering and terrorist financing
included in the definitions section in order to make
reference to Article 1 of Directive (EU) 2015/849
(AMLD).
The EBA opted to refer to an existing definition of
money laundering and terrorist financing risk in order
to maintain consistency across the different EBA
guidelines.
Whereas the same definition is included for ML/TF
risk in the EBA Guidelines on ML/TF ri sk factors
(EBA/GL/2021/02) and in the EBA Guidelines on risk -
based supervision (EBA/GL/2021/16), the definition
in the latter more clearly refers to ML/TF risk hence
Reference for ML/TF
risk definition in
Section 1.2 has been
amended from the
Risk factor
Guidelines to the
Risk-based
supervision
Guidelines
(EBA/GL/2021/16).

[Page 248]
248
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
the reference has been amended to refer to the Risk-
based supervision guidelines.
Holistic approach to inclusion
of ML/TF risks in the SREP
Several respondents indicated competent
authorities should take a holistic approach to avoid
the inclusion of ML/TF risks as a separate risk
category into the different SREP components
automatically resulting in downgrading the SREP
score. According to the respondents, such an
integrated approach should also ensure any
supervisory measures imposed under the SREP
should follow this integrated approach and not look
at ML/TF risk in isolation to other risks.
A few respondents suggested to use a hybrid
solution using an integrated approach to
incorporate ML/TF risks in the existing SREP
elements, but with an individualised assessment
and scoring for ML/TF risks.
The EBA has taken an integrated approach to
incorporating ML/TF risks into the SREP, rather than
creating a separate risk category with a separate risk
score. In that respect, there will only be an impact on
the SREP scores in as far as there is a prudential
impact of the ML/TF risks on the related risks.
With regard to the proposed hybrid solution, the EBA
notes the point and wishes to clarify that the
integrated approach has been taken in order to avoid
overlaps with the AML/CFT supervisory function that
is responsible for the supervision, assessment a nd
scoring of ML/TF risks.
No changes made.
Focus on residual ML/TF risk
Several respondents indicated that when
incorporating ML/TF risks in the SREP, competent
authorities should focus on the residual risk-taking
into account if processes are implemented by the
institution that enable appropriate management of
the risk.
ML/TF risks are not assessed and scored as a separate
risk under the SREP. In line with the integrated
approach, the prudential impact of ML/TF r isks feeds
into the assessment and scoring of the related risks.
Under the assessment and scoring approach in the
SREP as explained in Section 2.2.1, scores should
represent the residual risk.
Furthermore, not all the SREP elements are risks per
se, for ex ample the business model analysis is much
broader, hence the references to ML/TF risks in this
respect should be seen in this context.
No changes made.

[Page 249]
249
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Risk of overlap between
prudential and AML/CFT
supervisory functions
Whereas it was pointed out that the inclusion of
ML/TF risks will enhance the SREP supervisory
framework by adding more clarity and greater
harmonisation, several respondents voiced concern
that there could be a possible risk of overlap
between the prudential and AML/CFT supervisory
functions. Such an overlap would lead to a possible
duplication of reporting, and assessment of ML/TF
risks and potential dou ble penalties for the same
breach in the context of both the supervision under
Directive (EU) 2015/849 (AMLD) and under the
SREP.
In this context, one respondent indicated it should
be avoided that the various phases of the SREP
process would be hampered d ue to a lack of
effective coordination and timely information
exchange between supervisory authorities.
Linked to this, some respondents also pointed out
that only the AML/CFT supervisors have the
expertise to assess the ML/TF risks, and that the
competent authorities should rely on the expertise
of the AML/CFT supervisors to assess the ML/TF
risks.
The guidelines should not lead to duplication of
reporting as no additional reporting requirements are
established for institutions through these guidelines.
As regards the assessment of the ML/TF risks, as
clarified in the background and rationale section, and
in line with the integrated approach, the ML/TF risks
only feed into the SREP assessment in as far as there
is a prudential impact on the related risks, w hereas
the ML/TF risks under Directive (EU) 2015/849
(AMLD) are assessed by the AML/CFT supervisor.
Also, in line with the EBA AML/CFT Cooperation
Guidelines under CRD Article 117(6)
(EBA/GL/2021/15), competent authorities and
AML/CFT supervisors should en sure a timely
exchange of the relevant outcomes of their respective
assessments and information regarding the
supervisory measures and sanctions within their
supervisory remit. The structured cooperation and
mutual information under these guidelines should
allow prudential and AML/CFT supervisors to inform
their respective supervisory activities and avoid
unnecessary duplications or interference of
supervisory measures. Whereas a reference to the
AML/CFT Cooperation Guidelines was already
included in a numb er of places, references to these
guidelines have now been added in paragraphs 74,
87(e), 101, 146, 475(e) and 536.
References to
AML/CFT
Cooperation
Guidelines
(EBA/GL/2021/15)
have been added at
relevant instances.
Respect of different roles and
responsibilities of competent
Several respondents highlighted the importance to
acknowledge and respect the different roles and
responsibilities of competent authorities and
The EBA agrees on the importance of acknowledging
and respecting the different roles, responsibilities and
expertise of competent authorities and AML/CFT
Suggested changes
on the interaction
with AML/CFT

[Page 250]
250
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors
AML/CFT supervisors when incorporating ML/TF
risks in the SREP Guidelines, and to acknowledge
the expertise of AML/CFT supervisors with regard to
ML/TF risks.
supervisors, as underlined in the second subsection of
the background and rationale section. To further
clarify this throughout the guidelines, the following
paragraphs have been reworded (as further explained
below): 87(e), 101, 310, 472, 591 and 613.
supervisors are
further explained at
relevant instances.
Respect of different roles and
responsibilities of competent
authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors in the context of
business model analysis
One respondent suggested to reword paragraph
86(e) of the CP in order to clarify that in the context
of the business model analysis, competent
authorities need to rely on the assessment of ML/TF
risks and their mitigation by AML/CFT supervisors.
The EBA agrees on the importance of acknowledging
and respecting the different roles, responsibilities and
expertise of competent authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors. Paragraph 74 of Title 4 already sets out
the interaction with the AML/CFT supervisor in the
context of the business model analysis, so a cross -
reference to this paragraph was added.
However, the business model analysis is focused on
the broader context of the business model and not
assessed as a risk per se.
It should also be noted that the SREP Guidelines are
addressed to competent authorities, the guidelines
cannot be used to impose any obligations on
AML/CFT supervisors.
With regard to the cooperation and information
exchange between competent aut horities and
AML/CFT supervisors, the SREP Guidelines are
complemented by the EBA AML/CFT Cooperation
Guidelines under CRD Article 117(6)
(EBA/GL/2021/15).
Paragraph 87(e) has
been reworded to
refer to the
interaction with the
AML/CFT supervisor
Another respondent suggested to reword
paragraph 94(c) of the CP in order to clarify that in
the context of the business model analysis,
The EBA agrees on the importance of acknowledging
and respecting the different roles, responsibilities and
expertise of competent authorities and AML/CFT
No changes made.

[Page 251]
251
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
competent authorities need to rely on the
assessment of ML/TF risks and their mitigation by
AML/CFT supervisors.
supervisors. In the instance of paragraph 95(c) the
proposed suggestion was not included, as the
excessive concentration will remain a vulnerability for
the institution regardless of the mitigating measures
put in place by the institution.
Respect of different roles and
responsibilities of competent
authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors in the c ontext of
the internal governance
assessment
One respondent suggested to reword paragraph
100 of the CP in order to clarify that in the context
of the internal governance assessment, competent
authorities need to rely on the assessment of the
AML/CFT arran gements and mechanisms by
AML/CFT supervisors.
The EBA agrees on the importance of acknowledging
and respecting the different roles, responsibilities and
expertise of competent authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors. Paragraph 101 has been reworded to
make it clear er that whereas the competent
authorities should verify the existence of the
governance arrangements and mechanisms related
to AML/CFT, their actual assessment is performed by
the AML/CFT supervisor.
Paragraph 101 has
been reworded to
refer to the
interaction with the
AML/CFT supervisor
with regard to their
assessment of the
institutions’
arrangements and
mechanisms related
to AML/CFT
Respect of different roles and
responsibilities of competent
authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors in the context of
credit risk assessment
One respondent suggested to reword paragraph
170 of the CP in order to clarify that the verification
of whether the institution has included the
consideration of ML/TF risks in the context of the
credit granting process, and whether the
institutions has put in place systems and controls to
ensure funds to repay loans are fro m legitimate
sources and are within the remit of the AML/CFT
supervisor. The respondent also suggested to focus
on the most significant transactions since they
generate the greatest impact in terms of ML/TF
risks.
A few respondents pointed out that cross -
references should be added to relevant guidelines
The EBA notes the comment and would like to clarify
that the provision in paragraph 171 does not make
reference to the assessme nt of individual
transactions, but rather to the verification of whether
systems and controls have been put in place.
The provision also refers to the verification of
whether such systems and controls are in place rather
than the actual assessment of the e ffectiveness of
these systems and controls, which indeed would be
within the remit of the AML/CFT supervisor.
The EBA acknowledges the need to use cross -
references to other guidelines rather than repeating
the content of those guidelines. In paragraph 171
No changes made.

[Page 252]
252
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
rather than repeating the content of these
guidelines such as in paragraph 170.
such a cross-reference is made although a bit more
extended in order to clarify the context of the
provision.
One respondent suggested to reword paragraph
233(d) of the CP in order to clarify that the
verification of whether there are checks in place to
identify, assess and manage ML/TF risks to which
the institution is exposed as a result of the credit
granting activities is within the remit of the
AML/CFT supervisor.
Another responde nt suggested to reword
paragraph 223(d) of the CP in order to clarify that
the verification of whether the policies and
procedures also specify how ML/TF risks to which
the institution is exposed as a result of the credit -
granting activities are identified , assessed and
managed is within the remit of the AML/CFT
supervisor.
The provisions do not make reference to the
assessment of the actual effectiveness of the policies
and procedures, which indeed would be within the
remit of the AML/CFT supervisor.
No changes made.
Respect of different roles and
responsibilities of competent
authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors in the context of
operational risk assessment
One respondent suggested to reword paragraph
308 of the CP in order to clarify that the assessment
of operational risk management, measurement and
controls in relation to ML/TF risks is the
responsibility of the AML/CFT supervisor.
In line with the comment the link was made with the
assessment by the AML/CFT supervisor.
Paragraph 309 has
been reword ed to
make the link with
the ML/TF risk
assessment provided
by the AML/CFT
supervisor.
Another respondent suggested to add in paragraph
324 of the CP that the assessment of reputational
The commented provision does not refer to ML/TF
risks specifically. No changes made.

[Page 253]
253
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
risk related to ML/TF risks is provided by the
AML/CFT supervisor.
Respect of different roles and
responsibilities of competent
authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors in the context of
liquidity and funding risk
assessment
One respondent suggested to reword paragraph
469(e) of the CP to clarify that the AML/CFT
supervisor should assess the quality of the ML/TF
risk management system in the context of the
assessment of the funding risk.
The EBA agrees on the importance of acknowledging
and respecting the different roles, responsibilities and
expertise of competent authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors.
Whereas the AML/CFT supervisor would not assess
the funding profile of the institution as such, the
ML/TF risk assessment from t he AML/CFT supervisor
could have an impact on the funding profile so in that
respect the competent authorities should take into
account the ML/TF risk assessment findings where
relevant.
Paragraph 472(e)
has been reworded
to make the link with
the ML/TF risk
assessment provided
by the AML/CFT
supervisor.
Another respondent suggested to add to paragraph
472 (e) of the CP that the competent authorities
should liaise with the AML/CFT supervisor to obtain
their assessment of the ML/TF risk management
system and determine the impact on the funding
risk.
The EBA agrees on the importance of acknowledging
and respecting the different roles, responsibilities and
expertise of competent authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors. In this respect, competent authorities
should use the assessment of the AML/CFT supervisor
on the ML/TF risk management system and the
impact on the funding risk.
Paragraph 475(e)
has been re worded
to make the link with
the assessment of
the ML/TF risk
management system
provided by the
AML/CFT supervisor.
Respect of different roles and
responsibilities of competent
authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors in the context of
measures
One respondent suggested to add to paragraph 588
of the CP that the AML/CFT supervisor should duly
check the deficiencies and risks related to ML/TF
risks prior to the competent authorities’ assessment
of their impact on the prudential situation of the
institution.
The E BA acknowledges the need for competent
authorities to liaise with AML/CFT supervisors when
they have reasonable indications of deficiencies in the
institution’s systems and controls framework or
internal governance framework that are related to
AML/CFT. Whereas the provision already referred to
the need for prudential supervisors to notify the
AML/CFT supervisor in this context, the wording in
Paragraph 591 has
been expanded for
competent
authorities to liaise
with the AML/CFT
supervisor

[Page 254]
254
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
paragraph 591 has been further elaborated on in this
respect.
Respect of different roles and
responsibilities of competent
authorities and AML/CFT
supervisors in the context of
measures for entities of cross -
border groups
One respondent suggested to expand in paragraph
610 of the CP the part on the interaction with the
AML/CFT supervisor in the context of imposing
measures for entities of cross-border groups.
Whereas the necessary interaction with the AML/CFT
supervisor was already included in this provision and
a cross-reference was already made to the relevant
section of the EBA AML/CFT Coopera tion Guidelines,
following the comment received this was further
elaborated on in paragraph 613.
Paragraph 614 has
been reworded to
elaborate on the
interaction with
AML/CFT supervisors
References to risks in the
Guidelines include ML/TF risks
Several respondents indicated that footnote 18 of
the CP refers to the fact that: ‘any reference to risks
in these guidelines should include money
laundering and terrorist financing risks’ and despite
this mention, on a number of occasions throughout
the guidelines, ML/TF risks are explicitly mentioned
causing a lack of clarity as to whether the risks only
include ML/TF risks when this is explicitly
mentioned or every time t he word ‘risk’ appears in
the document.
The EBA acknowledges that any reference to risks
should include ML/TF risks and the fact that on
different occasions in the guidelines ML/TF risks are
mentioned could be perceived as confusing.
The EBA wishes to clar ify that also for other risks ,
specific risks are singled out throughout the
guidelines in order to provide specific guidance with
regard to that particular risk.
The reference to risks including ML/TF risks has been
moved to paragraph 5 of the Guidelines.
In the scoring grid for operational risk, reference is
made to ‘all relevant risks including ML/TF risk’ in
order to draw the attention of competent authorities.
As this could be seen as superfluous, the reference
has been removed from the scoring grid.
Table 6 was
amended to
remove the
superfluous
reference to all
relevant risks
‘including ML/TF
risk’.
Management body knowledge,
skills and experience regarding
ML/TF risks and procedures
(paragraph 147(b) of the CP)
Several respondents suggested to remove from
paragraph 147(b) of the CP the reference to
individual knowledge, skills and experience
regarding ML/TF risks and the relevant procedures
stating that the same level of expertise cannot be
The assessment under paragraph 148 is based on the
requirement for the management body to have
individually and collectively adequate knowledge,
skills and experience regarding the ML/TF risks and
the relevant procedures under the Joint ESMA and
Paragraph 148 has
been reworded to
ensure cross -

[Page 255]
255
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
expected in respect of each of the directors, and
what matters is the collective awareness of ML/TF
risks.
The respondents also pointed out that in their view
the Joint ESMA and EBA Guidelines on the
assessment of the suitability of members of the
management body and key function holde rs under
Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive 2014/65/EU
(EBA/GL/2021/06) do not require the management
body to individually have adequate knowledge,
skills and experience regarding the ML/TF risks and
the relevant procedures, but only collectively.
EBA Guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of
members of the management body and key function
holders under Directive 2013/36/EU and Directive
2014/65/EU (EBA/GL/2021/06).
The relevant paragraph was reworded to ensure
alignment and cross -reference to the relevant
guidelines.
reference to the
relevant guidelines.
Alignment of paragraph 147(b)
of the CP with the EBA
Guidelines on policies and
procedures in relation to
compliance management and
the role and responsibilities of
the AML/CFT Compliance
Officer
Several respondents pointed out the link between
the assessment of the suitability of the
management body under paragraph 147 of the CP
and the EBA Guidelines on policies and procedures
in relation to compliance management and the role
and responsibilities of the AML/CFT Compliance
Officer (EBA/CP/2021/31) and suggested to ensure
both are aligned and to include a cross-reference to
these guidelines.
The EBA acknowledges paragraph 148 needs to be
aligned to the EBA Guidelines on policies and
procedures in relation to compliance management
and the role and responsibilities of the AML/CFT
Compliance Officer (EBA/CP/2021/31). The cross
reference to these guidelines was included in the
paragraph as suggested, although, as these guidelines
are addressed to AML/CFT supervisors, the
competent authorities will need to rely on the
assessment of the AML/CFT supervisor in this respect.
Paragraph 148 has
been reworded to
include the
reference to the EBA
Guidelines on the
AML/CFT
Compliance Officer
Reference to transposition of
Directive (EU) 2015/849
(paragraph 147(c) of the CP)
One respondent suggested to remove the reference
to the transposition of Directive (EU) 2015/849 as
EBA guidelines cannot take primacy over national
law and the comply -or-explain procedure allows
competent authorities to declare that they will not
comply with the EBA guidelines if they deem that
their national law does not allow it.
The EBA notes the comment and has reworded
paragraph 148 remo ving the reference to the
transposition of Directive (EU) 2015/849.
Paragraph 148 has
been reworded
removing the
reference to the
transposition of
Directive (EU)
2015/849.

[Page 256]
256
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Roles of the management body
in its supervisory function and
management function
(paragraph 147(d) of the CP)
One respondent suggested to clarify that the
management body in its responsibility to ensure
that compliance with AML/CFT requirements is in
place in the context of the institution’s business and
risk strategy should a ct both in its supervisory
function and in its management function.
The EBA notes the comment and has reworded
paragraph 148 to ensure alignment and cross -
reference to the relevant guidelines.
Paragraph 148 has
been reworded to
ensure cross -
reference to th e
relevant guidelines.
Avoiding overlap with existing
requirements
Several respondents pointed out that there are a
number of areas where overlap should be avoided
with existing regulation and requirements that
consider the same issues to prevent a dual impact
on institutions.
An example cited in reference to the overlap with
existing requirements is paragraph 147 of the CP in
the internal governance assessment.
The SREP Guidelines are not addressed to institutions
but to competent authorities for the purpose of their
SREP assessment. In that respect the guidelines
include provisions on the supervisory assessment of
institutions’ compliance with requirements that are
set out in other regulatory products which in itself are
addressed to institutions. The guidance for the
supervisory assessment is based on the existing
requirements and thus does not create a dual impact
on the institution.
Paragraph 148 does not duplicate the requirement
for institutions, but it addresses the assessment by
competent authorities of the requirement laid out in
the joint ESMA/EBA Guidelines (EBA/GL/2021/06).
No changes made.
Distribution of responsibi lities
between AML/CFT supervisors,
financial intelligence units and
law enforcement authorities
One respondent pointed out that, in their view, only
the AML/CFT supervisor should be responsible for
identifying the sources of operational risk to which
an institution is exposed in the area of ML/TF risks,
and competent authorities should not rely on
information received from financial intelligence
units and law enforcement authorities in this
respect. The respondent suggested to reword
paragraph 278 of the C P to clarify that for the
Paragraph 279 refers to the determination of the
scope of the assessment of operational risk in
general, not only to the ML/TF risks. In that respect
the EBA would not agree with competent authorities
only relying on information from financial intelligence
units, law enforcement authorities and other relevant
information if it has been duly investigated by the
AML/CFT supervisor, though the sentence in this
paragraph has been shortened.
Paragraph 279 has
been reworded in
order to shorten the
sentence.

[Page 257]
257
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
determination of the scope of the assessment of
operational risk competent authorities should only
take into account other relevant information
received from financial intelligence units and law
enforcement authorities or other pu blicly available
information ‘after due investigation by the
AML/CFT supervisor’.
Exposure to ML/TF risk
regardless of the institution’s
size or financial soundness
(paragraph 307)
One respondent suggested to remove paragraph
307 of the CP from Section 6.4 on the assessment of
operational risk to the background and rationale as
it concerns general considerations.
Paragraph 308 is in this section in view of the link with
the reputational risk. No changes made.
Comments related to proportionality and simplification
Further simplification of the
guidelines
Most respondents welcomed the possibility of
simplifying the assessment to be performed by the
competent authorities for the SREP even though
most of the answers were pointing at the
introduction of more proportionality.
One respondent suggested that further
simplification and readability of the guidelines could
be achieved through graphs such as illustrating
values and stacking order including the proposed
leverage ratio requirement, or the addition of a
standardised template for the communication of
the SREP outcome which would provide competent
authorities and institutions with a simplified view of
the SREP decisions.
Another respondent pointed out that the
The EBA welcomes the comment and wishes to clarify
that whereas the current review strengthens the
proportionality principle in the SREP Guidelines as
described below, further adjustments aimed at
simplifying the text of the guidelines may be
considered in the next review.
In line with the suggestion, a graph has been included
in the background and rationale section to illustrate
the two different stacks of requirements and better
clarify the interaction between them.
The current text already uses references extensively.
Where other regulatory products already set out
requirements for the competent authorities,
repetitions are avoided and cross-references made. It
is also to be noted that the SREP Guidelines set out
requirements for the assessment by the competent
A graph has been
added in the
background and
rationale section to
illustrate the TREA -
based versus the LR -
based stack of own
funds requirements.

[Page 258]
258
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
simplification could be achieved by using references
rather than repeating the requirements of other
regulatory products.
authorities, not requirements for institutions. In that
respect there is a link with the related guidelines
though no duplication of the requirement.
Granularity of the SREP
assessment in view of
materiality of risks A number of respondents suggested to clarify in the
guidelines that irrespective of the size and category
of the institution , the granularity of the SREP
assessment can be adapted considering the
materiality of specific risks for the institution in
question.
Along th ese lines, one respondent suggested
introducing some indicators (such as quantitative
limits in retribution for the identification of risk-
takers, the 1% threshold for NPLs in developing
countries, etc.) to further enhance the application
of the principle of proportionality.
A few respondents pointed out that the reference
in paragraph 53 of the CP to the tailoring of the
scope and depth of the review of the individual
SREP elements to the specific risk profile of the
institution for Category 4 banks should be described
more concretely.
The EBA acknowledges that regardless of the size and
categorisation of an institution, the granularity of the
SREP assessment can be adapted according to the risk
profile of the specific institution in order to ensure
that the SREP remains focused on the most material
risks. Whereas this was already included in
paragraphs 56 and 58, it has been further clarified in
a specific additional Subsection 2.4.6.
The introduction of specific indicators and thresholds
was not considered appropriate to avoid overly
mechanistic application of the SREP. Competent
authorities should be able to make their own
assessment of the materiality of risks, given specific
circumstances of the institution. However, some
limited indicators were introduced, for instance
through a reference to small banking book criteria in
the context of the assessment of market risk.
Given the above clarifications added across the
guidelines, the te xt of paragraph 53 stating that the
scope and depth of the review of the individual SREP
elements should be tailored to the specific risk profile
of the institution can be kept unchanged at this stage,
though it has been made more apparent.
Addition of
Subsection 2.4.6 on
the focus and
granularity of the
SREP assessment
Inclusion of the
reference to the
tailoring of the scope
and depth of the
review of the
individual SREP
elements for the
SREP Category 4
institutions in
paragraph 53(c).
Specific guidance on
application of proportionality
A number of respondents suggested to provide
specific guidance on the application of
The EBA notes the suggestions to provide specific
guidance on proportionality throughout the
Clarifications on the
application of

[Page 259]
259
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
throughout the SREP
Guidelines
proportionality throughout the guidelines, and in
particular in Titles 5, 6 and 8.
One example mentioned where proportionality
application could be included is paragraph 493 of
the CP as according to the respondent the
concentration limits go too far for smaller and
medium-sized institutions.
guidelines. Whereas the proportionality p rinciple as
set out in Section 2.4 applies throughout the
guidelines, following the feedback the EBA has added
guidance on proportionality in the most relevant
titles (6 and 8) further specifying the application of
the general proportionality principle. The aim is to
allow competent au thorities to perform a lighter
assessment on some specific risk areas (such as for
instance market risk, liquidity and funding risk) in the
case of small and medium -sized institutions with a
low exposure to these sources of risks.
proportionality
added in paragraphs
182, 191, 195, 197,
200 (credit and
counterparty risk),
238, 240 (market
risk), 293, 305
(operational risk),
461, 464, 465, 470,
476, 477 and 492
(liquidity and
funding risk).
Further differentiation
between the SREP categories
One respondent suggested to include further
differentiation in the guidelines between SREP
Categories 3 and 4. The respondent suggested that
for instance a longer period could be envisaged
compared to the 3 years currently foreseen for the
exercise of the SREP assessment for Category 4
institutions, which is a point that was also brought
up by other respondents.
A few respondents suggested to clarify that the 3-
yearly assessment of the SREP should cover the
main elements of the SREP and not all individual
criteria mentioned in the Guidelines
The respondent also suggested to introduce a more
clear distinction between SREP Categories 2 and 3.
Whereas the assessment every 3 years of the
individual SREP elements is seen as a minimum also
for the SREP Category-4 institutions, as outlined in
Table 1, the scope and depth of the review can be
tailored to the specific risk profile of the institution.
This has been made more apparent in paragraph 53.
The notion of ‘SREP element’ as used throughout the
guidelines is defined in Title 1 (i.e. ‘ SREP element’
means one of the following: business model analysis,
assessment of internal governance and institution -
wide risk controls, assessme nt of risks to capital, the
SREP capital assessment, assessment of risks to
liquidity and funding, or the SREP liquidity
assessment).
As for the differentiation between categories 2 and 3,
the EBA would like to clarify that as opposed to
Category 2 institutions, Category 3 institutions are
small to medium (as opposed to medium to large) and
mainly operate domestically or with non -significant
Provisions of
paragraph 53 have
been made more
apparent.
No changes made.
with regard to
Categories 2-3

[Page 260]
260
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
cross-border operations, and in a limited number of
business lines.
Further differentiation
between ‘small and non -
complex’ institutions
A few respondents suggested to include further
differentiation between small and non -complex
institutions based on capital market orientation
similar to the distinction made for disclosures in the
CRR.
Whereas in CRR Article 433(2) there is a
differentiation in some disclosure requirements for
small and non -complex institutions that are non -
listed, this is not considered a relevant criterion for
the frequency or intensity of the SREP and would
therefore not have an impact on Pillar 2.
No changes made.
Use of CRR classifications of
large and small and non -
complex institutions for Pillar 2
purposes
A few respondents questioned whether it is
appropriate to use the CRR classifications of ‘large’
and ‘small and non-complex’ institutions for Pillar 2
purposes as they were primarily defined for the
purposes of granting reporting and disclosure relief.
The respondents proposed to leave competent
authorities with the possibility to apply other
relevant criteria , such as the business model and
other crite ria referred to in the EBA’s discussion
paper on proportionality assessment methodology
(EBA/DP/2021/03).
In this context, one of the respondents suggested in
particular to allow competent authorities to apply
other relevant criteria and classify an insti tution as
SREP Category 4 even if the CRR criteria for ‘small
and non-complex institution’ are not met.
Whereas the CRR classification has been linked to the
Pillar 2 categorisation in order to ensure consistency
in the treatment of institutions across the different
Pillars, the provisions do include other relevant
criteria for the categorisation.
Also for SREP Category 4 other criteria are included in
Section 2.1.1. In this respect, Category 4 will include
institutions defined as ‘small and non-complex’ under
the CRR, as well as all other small non -complex
institutions that do not fall into categories 1 to 3 (e.g.
with a limited scope of activities and non -significant
market shares in their lines of business).
No changes made.
Title 5: Internal governance and institution-wide controls
Suitability of key function
holders
Several respondents pointed out that the scope of
the assessment of key function holders should not
be the same as for members of the management
The assessment of key f unction holders is one
necessary measure to ensure robust governance
arrangements required by Directive 2013/36/EU
No changes made.

[Page 261]
261
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
body. It should therefore be limited to initial
assessments and exclude re-assessments.
under Articles 74 and 88. Directive 2014/65/EU
shares the same approach under Article 9(1) (which
recalls Article 88 of Directive 2013/36/EU) and under
Article 16(2). These provisions are clarified in the EBA
Guidelines on the assessment of the suitability of
members of the management body and key function
holders (EBA/GL/2021/06).
Competent authorities should ensure that all key
function holde rs within an institution are suitable.
The suitability assessments of the key function
holders for significant institutions should be
performed by competent authorities at least at the
consolidating institution’s level.
Implementation of a diversity
policy
Several respondents pointed out that assessing the
implementation of a diversity policy for the
composition of the management body and within
the institutions’ recruitment policy would go
beyond the provisions of the E BA Guidelines on
suitability of the management body
(EBA/GL/2021/06) and would contradict European
and national anti-discrimination regulations.
Some respondents evidenced that some institutions
(especially public law institutions) have no influence
on the composition of the supervisory body
resulting notably from election outcomes, or
appointments, and therefore cannot ensure a wide
range of experience, knowledge, skills and values.
Article 91(10) of Directive 2013/36/EU specifically
refers to diversity to be taken into account for the
selection of members of the management body. The
EBA is mandated by Article 91(12) of that Directive to
issue guidelines detailing such a notion of div ersity.
The EBA Guidelines on the assessment of the
suitability of members of the management body
(EBA/GL/2021/06) require diversity within the
management body, both in its executive and
supervisory functions, as it leads to a broader range
of experience, knowledge, skills and value, therefore
enhancing the functioning of such a body.
Additionally, those Guidelines require diversity
criteria to be reflected in the recruitment policy to
ensure a sufficiently diverse pool of members of the
management body. Th e SREP Guidelines have been
clarified on that basis.
Paragraph 103(c)
amended to further
reflect the provisions
of the EBA
Guidelines on the
assessment of the
suitability of
members of the
management body.

[Page 262]
262
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
The abovementioned EBA Guidelines clarify the
requirements of Article 91(10) of Directive
2013/36/EU. Diversity criteria should accompany
anti-discrimination rules, as part of robust
governance arrangeme nts. This principle is without
prejudice to national laws regarding anti -
discrimination. The SREP Guidelines have been
clarified on that basis.
The EBA is aware of some specific legal structures and
their resulting challenges. However, the provisions of
Directive 2013/36/EU apply to all institutions,
therefore requiring the ad hoc nomination committee
to consider requirements on the composition and
suitability of the management body.
Implementation of internal
whistleblowing procedures
With regard to the assessment of internal
whistleblowing procedures, several respondents
considered that ensuring information could be
submitted in an anonymised way goes beyond the
requirements set out in Directive (EU) 2019/2037,
as that Directive only refers to confi dentiality of
identity.
The provisions of the SREP Guidelines are in line with
Article 71 of Directive 2013/36/EU requiring
appropriate protection of employees of institutions
who report breaches committed within the
institution against retaliation, discrimination, or other
types of unfair treatment, and with the EBA
Guidelines on Internal Governance (EBA/GL/2021/05)
leaving the possibility for the staff to ask for
anonymity towards the management body and other
relevant functions to avoid pressure from the
institution. Such anonymity does not impede the
institution to get further clarification on the report
and could be waived in line with national law in the
context of further investigations or subsequent
judicial proceedings. The clarification with regard to
Paragraph 105(e)
amended to further
reflect the provisions
of the EBA
Guidelines on
Internal Governance.

[Page 263]
263
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
the right for anonymity was included in the SREP
Guidelines.
Identification and monitoring
of conflict of interest
One respondent highlighted that the requirements
regarding the identification and monitoring of
potential conflict of interest resulting from
transactions with the management body and
related parties a re already covered in the EBA
Guidelines on Internal Governance.
While the EBA Guidelines on Internal Governance
(EBA/GL/2021/05), as cross -referred in the SREP
Guidelines, describe the responsibilities of the
management body to set up and implement a
framework for identifying and managing conflicts of
interest in the context of granting loans and entering
into other transactions with members of the
management body and their related parties, the SREP
Guidelines specify responsibilities of the competent
authorities to assess whether such a framework has
been correctly identified and implemented.
No changes made.
Code of conduct
Respondents stated that the code of conduct set by
institutions is usually addressed to employees who
do not engage in major econom ic offenses.
Therefore, they suggested to amend the scope of
such a code of conduct, focusing more on individual
misconduct.
Tax offenses, antitrust practices and other offenses
and misconduct are relevant factors that should be
considered within the code of conduct, which should
be addressed to all employees, including senior
management and members of the management
body. The likelihood of any stakeholders engaging in
such activities should not be the basis for developing
and adopting high ethical and professional standards.
No changes made.
Allocation between fixed and
variable elements of
remuneration
One respondent suggested to further align the SREP
guidelines with paragraph 134 of the EBA
Guidelines on sound remuneration policies
(EBA/GL/2021/04) regarding the allocation of
different components between variable and fixed
elements of remuneration, especially the allocation
of allowances.
The EBA Guidelines on sound remuneration
(EBA/GL/2021/04) require institutions to consider
particular remunerat ion components, notably
allowances. Institutions should analyse such
allowances and allocate them to the variable and
fixed components of remuneration. The SREP
Guidelines already adequately reflect the EBA
Guidelines on sound remuneration.
No changes made.

[Page 264]
264
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Restrictions to variable
remuneration due to
recommendations from ESRB
One respondent suggested to delete the reference
to the ESRB recommendations with regard to
remuneration, in line with Regulation (EU) No
1092/2010, as the ESRB does not issue
recommendations directly to credit institutions.
Article 15(2) of Regulation (EU) No 1092/2010 states
that the ESRB can issue warnings and
recommendations to the Union as a whole, or to one
or more member states, or to one or more of the
ESAs, or to one or more of the national supervisory
authorities. To be applicable to institutions, such
ESRB recommendations would have to be passed
through by competent authorities and are therefore
already in the scope of the relevant paragraph,
without the need to mention them explicitly.
Paragraph 106(h)
amended deleting
the reference to the
ESRB.
Role of the risk management
function
Some respondents suggested to reword paragraph
107(b) of the consultation paper in order to clarify
that the risk management function should
‘promote’ and not ‘ ensure’ that group -wide risks
are identified, measured, assessed, monito red and
properly reported, as such a responsibility should
be shared with the senior management.
The EBA Guidelines on Internal Governance
(EBA/GL/2021/05) require the risk management
function to ensure that all group -wide risks are
identified, measured, moni tored and reported and
that the risk strategy is complied with. The term
'ensure' reflects the final accountability of the
management body in its executive and supervisory
function for an effective and prudent management of
the institution.
No changes made.
Role of the head of the
compliance function
Some respondents suggested to reword paragraph
112(h) of the consultation paper, as the head of
compliance does not have to be involved in risk
management decisions
The SREP Guidelines require strengthened process for
the approval of decisions where the he ad of risk
management function or the head of the compliance
function has expressed a negative view. Using the
term 'or' ensures that the roles of risk management
function and compliance function are not mixed,
while considered complementary for sound
governance of an institution. This provision does not
No changes made.

[Page 265]
265
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
imply that the head of compliance must be involved
in all decisions.
Assessment of institutions’
stress testing framework
Some respondents suggested to disconnect the
outcomes of institutions’ internal stress tests and its
risk appetite, limits and level of internal capital and
liquidity. Some respondents highlighted that there
should be no automatic link between institutions’
internal stress test results and their risk and
strategic management, including in the definition of
risk appetite and limits.
The EBA Guidelines on Internal Governance
(EBA/GL/2021/05) require the risk management
function to assess the actual risk profile of the
institution against its risk appetite. Such an
assessment should be performed under business -as-
usual conditions as well as under stressed conditions
to allow the risk management function to perform
potential necessary adjustments to the risk profile.
The institutions ’ stress tests, regardless of whether
they are carried out as part of the ICAAP or ILAAP,
should be part of the risk management framework
and therefore should be taken into account in the
setup of the risk appetite. However, while the results
of stress testing should be considered, adjustment of
the risk profile, risk appetite or limits should not be
automatic.
Section on
quantitative
assessment of stress
testing clarified by
referring more
broadly to
institutions’ stress
tests and not limiting
the scope of
assessment to the
stress tests done for
ICAAP and ILAAP
purposes.
Definition of meaningful risk
data
Some respondents asked for clarification of the use
of the term ‘meaningful risk data’ under Section 5.8
Information and communication technologies and
business continuity management.
The assessment criteria included in Section 5.8 focus
on the ability of the institution to generate aggregate
information that is fit for purpose and constitutes an
appropriate basis for business decisions. It was
further clarified that for this purpose the data should
be consistent across different ICT systems.
Paragraph 144(a) has
been amended to
further align with the
EBA Guidelines on
ICT risk assessment
under the SREP.
Structure of the management
body
One respondent suggested differentiating the SREP
assessment considering the dual or monist
structure of the management body.
The assessment criteria specified under Title 5
are neutral to the structure of the management
body.
No changes made.

[Page 266]
266
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Title 6: Assessing risks to capital
Risk categories and CSRBB
Some respondents suggested reintroducing
paragraphs 145 and 146, which were deleted in the
CP. More specifically, the respondents questioned
the proposed allocation of certain subcategories of
risk arguing that these risks may be treated
differently by different institutions and hence
allocated differently in their ICAAPs.
Along the same lines, some respondents argued
against the introduction of CSRBB as a s eparate
source of risk as they claimed this would not be
consistent with predominant industry practices.
The specified categories and subcategories of risk are
to be considered for the purpose of the supervisory
assessment. However, this is not necessarily expected
to be reflected by the institutions in their ICAAP.
Internal risk management processes should continue
to be organised by the institutions as they see it most
fit in line with their specific business model and risk
profile, and the ICAAP is supposed to offer an internal
view of the institution on the identified risks.
Therefore, d ifferences may exist between the
institution’s internal and supervisory classification of
risks.
The specification of the most common elements of
each of the main risks in the GL is important to ensure
the completeness of the analysis and the level playing
field for institutions that will be subject to the SREP
by different authorities. For the purpose of the SREP
and resulting determination of additional own funds
requirements, it is important that the classification of
elements of risk corresponds to their allocation in the
prudential framework for Pillar 1 requirements.
No changes made.
Credit risk
Several respondents were requesting the deletion
of certain sub -risk categories listed under credit
risk:
The sub -risk categories mentioned under credit risk
may in some cases be material sources of risk and
therefore they should b e part of the assessment
related to the SREP. They are classified under credit
Reference in
footnote 50
amended.

[Page 267]
267
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
- Equity Risk in the Banking Book: this is not
understood as a conventional source of
credit risk but rather as a market risk.
- Real Estate Risk: this is understood as
referring to the investment (price) risk that
arises when investing in the institution’s
own real estate. These investments can be
seen as an opportunity to broaden and
diversify an institution’s earnings. In this
respect, it is not primar ily or necessarily a
credit risk, but could either be classified as
a risk category on its own or addressed as
a subcategory of market risk.
- Model Risk: in the context of credit risk,
this can only refer to IRBA and CCR models
under Pillar 1 that have been approved by
the supervisory authorities. These are
already under the ongoing model review
process and any model deficiencies can be
addressed using add -ons under Pillar 1. It
could also be assumed that these risks are
already taken into account sufficient ly in
Pillar 2 by addressing model risks under
operational risk.
One respondent suggested correcting the
reference included in footnote 45 as it was
referring to the EBA Guidelines on
management of non -performing and forborne
exposures (EBA/GL/2018/06), whereas the text
of paragraph 196(b)(ii) was referring to the EBA
Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring.
risk consistently with their treatment under the Pillar
1 requirements.
Similarly, for model risk, given that certain measures
on regulatory approved models can be applied
though Pillar 1 requirements for a specific type of risk,
the allocation of Pillar 2 must be consistent. The
scope of model risk treated under operational risk
refers to any models used for business purposes that
do not require supervisory approval and are not used
for the purpose of own funds requirements.
The Guidelines to which footnote 45 (footnote 50 of
the final version of the Guidelines) referred are the
EBA Guidelines on loan origination and monitoring ,
therefore the reference has been amended.

[Page 268]
268
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Market risk
With regard to the assessment of market risk, some
respondents requested the deletion of the newly
introduced subcategories of risk (non -delta, basis
risk and market liquidity risk) claiming that these
sources of risk are already covered under the other
categories.
The sub-risk categories mentioned under market risk
may in some cases be material sources of risk and
therefore they should be part of the assessment
related to the SREP.
Furthermore, it should be underlined that the
subcategories of risk are not meant to be mutually
exclusive and any measures of these subcategories of
risk are not necessarily additive. Rather, these are
aspects that competent authorities should take into
consideration in their assessment, first by
determining whether they are relevant for a g iven
institution, then by carrying out a deeper analysis
where this is necessary due to the risk profile of the
institution.
No changes made.
Market risk – CCPs
Some respondents requested the EBA to consider
the following aspects related to the reduction of the
exposure towards non -EU CCPs: (i) the capacity of
the European players to absorb the consequent
increase in volume that will be generated; (ii) the
risk that European banks will not be able to
maintain their ability to fund their European clients
under competitive conditions compared to their
peers and (iii) the execution risk.
To avoid the risks to financial stability or disruptions
that could materialise in the event of a recovery /
resolution event in a third country CCP, EU
institutions are encouraged to reduce any excess
exposure to non -EU CCPs. This would be particularly
relevant for exposures to UK CCPs, in the context of
Commission Implementing Decision (EU) 2020/1308.
Nevertheless, cases of objective operational
impediments to moving the business from non -EU to
EU CCPs in a timely manner may be taken into
account by the competent authorities based on their
normal supervisory powers.
No changes made.

[Page 269]
269
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Operational risk
Some respondents requested to review the
guidance for the prelimi nary assessment of
operational risk, as the information requested
might not be available for smaller institutions.
Some other respondents requested to further stress
the importance of the ICT subcategory of risk as
cybersecurity incidents represent a material source
of risk for individual credit institutions and the
financial stability as a whole.
Another respondent su ggested reverting to the
previous wording of paragraph 279(a) of the CP, i.e.
reference to operational risk tolerance instead of
operational risk appetite (as used under the revised
version of the Guidelines), as this would be more
appropriate in the conte xt of the preliminary
assessment of operational risk.
The preliminary assessment aims at determining the
areas of focus in the assessment of operational risk.
These preliminary checks require competent
authorities to acquire generic information on the
institution’s activities to flag potential areas of
material operational risk. If certain areas are not
materially risky to an institution, an in -depth
assessment will not be necessary. The general
preliminary assessment is therefore also relevant for
smaller institutions. Nevertheless, the guidance was
amended to further strengthen the principle of
proportionality.
Regarding ICT risk, it is clear that cybersecurity is an
important element of risk and this is already
recognised in the context of the SREP. The
assessment of ICT risk under the SREP is set out in
separate EBA GL on ICT Risk Assessment under the
SREP (EBA/GL/2017/05). The SREP GL refer to them to
avoid any repetitions or inconsistencies. The EBA GL
on ICT Risk Assessment under the SREP recognise ICT
security risk as a separate risk category and set out
specific assessment of controls for managing this risk.
The references to risk appetite have been included
consistently across the guidelines in line with its
definition. In addition, the latest revisi on of EBA
Guidelines on Internal Governance includes a
reference only to the risk appetite (and not risk
tolerance). Therefore, to ensure consistency the EBA
does not see the need to change the wording.
Paragraph 280(i)
amended.

[Page 270]
270
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Other risks
Some respondents requested the EBA to exclude
from the text of the GL the reference to step-in risk,
arguing that as described in BCBS 423, this is already
covered by the risk categories included in the text
(reputational risk, strategic and business risk).
One respondent suggested the removal of the
provisions laid out in paragraph 304(f) in Section
6.4.3 that requires competent authorities to take
into account the reputation of the individuals
involved in the management of the institution when
performing the assessment on reputational risk to
which the institution is exposed.
The definition of step -in risk given in recital 9 of the
RTS on Prudential consolidation (EBA/RTS/2021/04),
i.e. the possibility that an institution may decide to
provide financial support to an unconsolidated entity
that is facing stress, even in the absence of, or in
excess of, any contractual obligations, is not
overlapping with the other subcategories of risk
mentioned by the respondents (i.e. reputational risk,
strategic and business risk).
In line with the general principles applicable to the
SREP, competent authorities should carry out a
comprehensive assessment of risks faced by the
institution, while avoiding any double counting.
The assessment of reputational risk to be perform ed
by competent authorities has the purpose of
identifying the risk to which the institution is exposed
and the members of the management body clearly
have an influence on this risk. Nevertheless, h aving
done the assessment, the competent authorities have
to decide whether and what type of measures
(qualitative or quantitative) are most adequate to
address this source of risk, and also take into account
actions already taken.
No changes made.
Title 7: SREP capital assessment
Question 2: Do you think that the proposed overall framework for setting additional own funds requirements appropriately incorporates the ICAAP information
and estimates?
The role of ICAAP Respondents considered that the guidelines provide
insufficient harmonisation for the setting of
The ICAAP is considered a key input for the
identification and assessment of risks as part of the
No changes made.

[Page 271]
271
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
additional own funds. In view of significant
investments leading to increased reliability of the
ICAAP over the past year, respondents suggested
the ICAAP to b e the sole quantitative basis for the
P2R, avoiding distorting effects linked to qualitative
assessment and supervisory judgement, as well as
supervisory benchmarks which tend to be overly
conservative.
Some respondents suggested to reinstate
paragraph 360 and 361 deleted in the CP, ensuring
P2R to be determined in a consistent manner with
regard to the content of the ICAAP and in light of
the results of supervisory dialogue and interactions
with the institutions.
SREP, and if reliable or at least partially reliable for the
quantification of P2R. Nevertheless, as an internal
process of an institution, the ICAAP cannot be used as
the sole basis for the determinat ion of P2R, as it may
incentivise institutions to underestimate the risk.
While determining P2R, competent authorities
should also consider the overall consistency of
requirements between institutions and should ensure
a level playing field, and should the refore use other
sources of information, including regulatory
benchmarks.
The aspects covered in deleted paragraphs 360 and
361 have been reflected in a broader sense in
paragraphs 362 and 369(e) of the CP (paragraphs 363
and 370(e) of the final GL). Furth ermore, the
consideration of the outcomes of supervisory
dialogue has been further strengthened in Section 7.6
of the Guidelines, setting out requirements for the
justification of supervisory decisions.
Reliability criteria for the ICAAP
Respondents requested more clarity on the
reliability criteria for the ICAAP. Several
respondents suggested to subject to supervisory
benchmarks only unreliable ICAAP.
All four criteria proposed for the asses sment of
reliability of the ICAAP have bee n further clarified to
facilitate consistent assessment.
Paragraph 375 has
been amended,
further clarifying the
criteria related to
the assessment of
reliability of ICAAP
calculations.
Other comments to Section 7.2
Scope of P2R Respondents advocated that risks that are not
covered or not sufficiently covered by Pillar 1
As per Article 104a(1)(a) of the Directive 2013/36/EU,
competent authorities should impose additional own
No changes made.

[Page 272]
272
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
requirements should not automatically be included
for the determination of additional capital
requirements.
funds requirement where on the basis of the SREP
assessment, competent authorities conclude that
institutions are exposed to risks or elements of risk s
that are not covered or not sufficiently covered by
Pillar 1 requirements, including risks explicitly
excluded from Pillar 1.
While considering additional own funds
requirements, competent authorities should
however focus on risks that are material to th e
institutions and that are not covered or not
sufficiently covered by Pillar 1 requirements.
Application of risk -by-risk
quantification methodology
Respondents remarked that applying a Pillar 1 floor
for the computation of capital considered adequate
was not properly considering the risk profile of the
institutions, notably inter -risk diversification, and
reduced the relevance of ICAAP’s internal risk
quantification. Such an application of a Pillar 1 floor
could result in overestimated Pillar 1 requirements,
especially for institutions using standardi sed
approaches.
While the exemption from risk -by-risk assessment
for small institutions, where it is overly burdensome
to meani ngfully disentangle two or more types of
risk, was appreciated, respondents suggested to
introduce more flexibility allowing such an
exemption to be applied in light of the risk profile of
the institution.
Pillar 1 requirements, as set out in Regulation (EU) No
575/2013, are the regulatory minimum of capital an
institution should meet at all times. Pillar 1
requirements cannot be offset with other risks or
elements of risk that are not covered by this
requirement.
Given the requirements of Directive 2013/36/EU, the
SREP should be based on the analysis of the individual
risks relevant for the institution, and competent
authorities should consider risks which are not
covered or not sufficiently covered by Pillar 1
requirements.
Competent authorities should ta ke a prudent
approach while considering risk -diversification
effects. Inter -risk diversification is not allowed in
setting additional own funds requirements to ensure
the most appropriate coverage of risks, both under
normal and adverse conditions. However , the
diversification of the institution’s business activities
No changes made.

[Page 273]
273
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
and related diversification of risks can be considered
in the business model analysis in accordance with
Title 4 of the SREP Guidelines.
Temporary P2R
Respondents asked for cl arifications with regard to
the duration, explanation and procedural review
where additional capital requirements are imposed
in line with letters (b) to (f) of Article 104(1)(a) of
Directive 2013/36/EU. They suggested that where
P2R is set on a temporary basis until certain
deficiencies are remedied, such a decision should
be reviewed on an ongoing basis or at least
biannually.
The decision to set P2R should be re -assessed by
competent authorities at least during the next SREP,
in line with the minimum engagement level, and the
capital add -ons lifted if identified deficiencies have
been mitigated. Competent authorities may adjust
the add-on in between the SREP cycle and as soon as
they assess that the deficiency has been
appropriately fixed. However, due to a different
nature of possible deficiencies and related mitigating
actions which may require different timelines for
implementation, it would not be appropriate to
define a fixed frequency for review in the SREP
Guidelines.
No changes made.
P2R to cover model
deficiencies
Respondents required confirmation that P2R to
cover model deficiencies is exceptional and
temporary and should only apply where it is not
possible to address such deficiencies through other
supervisory measures.
The possibility for competent authorities to impose
P2R for model deficiencies in accordance with Article
104a(1)(d) of Directive 2013/36/EU should be applied
only where the application of the internal model for
regulatory purposes is likely to lead to inadequate
own funds requirements not already addressed under
Pillar 1 requirements or through other supervisory
measures. On that basis, such a capital add-on should
be exceptional and temporary, requiring competent
authorities to lift it as soon as identified deficiencies
are remedied.
No changes made.

[Page 274]
274
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
P2R to cover repeated P2G
breach
Some respondents suggested that the timing to set
P2R to cover repeated P2G breach should be
extended to at least 4 years.
The option to transform P2G into P2R should be
activated where the institution fails to establish or
maintain P2G in a repeated manner. For this purpose,
the period of 2 years is considered sufficiently long for
institutions to take appropriate actions. Competent
authorities may further postpone the decision to set
P2R based on general economic or market conditions
or based on instituti on-specific circumstances,
leaving sufficiently flexibility for competent
authorities to consider specific situations. Extending
the period in a general manner to 4 years would not
be sufficiently prudent.
No changes made.
Question 3: Do you agree with the proposed clarifications on the assessment of the risk of excessive leverage?
Determining P2R-LR
Respondents suggested to limit the imposition of
P2R-LR to exceptional and duly justified cases, as
the majority of institutions in the EU are not subject
to risk of excessive leverage due to the nature of
their business and operating models.
Moreover, respondents advocated for a more
specific guidance for the determination of P2R -LR,
to ensure a fair and equal treatment of all
institutions. Such guidance should refer to the
ICAAP as the basis for the quantification of P2R-LR.
The determination of any P2R -LR is linked to the
results of the competent authorities’ assessment of
the risk of excessive leverage, and to the
consideration whether this ris k is material for the
institutions. However, P2R-LR should not be imposed
automatically; such a decision should take into
account various sources of information and
supervisory judgement.
The determination of P2R-LR should consider specific
aspects includi ng, if deemed reliable or at least
partially reliable, the ICAAP calculations and other
relevant inputs. This has been further clarified in this
paragraph referring to all relevant sources of
information.
Paragraph 398
amended referring
not only to the
methods but also to
sources of
information
competent
authorities should
use to determine
P2R-LR.

[Page 275]
275
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Viability of P2R -LR
determination methodology
Should P2R -LR be imposed as additional capital
requirements, this would constitute an unexpected
increase in capita l ratio requirements, in which
case, some respondents argued, an impact analysis
should first be carried out to ensure the P2R -LR
determination methodology can be applied
proportionately.
Competent authorities should consider P2R-LR based
on the revisions of Directive 2013/36/EU, which,
subject to national transposition, are applicable since
December 2020. However, as explained in Section
7.6, any decision to impose additional own funds
requirements should be subject to a structured and
transparent supervisory dialogue with the institution,
ensuring a proportionate application.
No changes made.
Definition of the risk of
excessive leverage
Respondents asked for clarifications on the concept
of risk of excessive leverage, deemed currently too
general and insufficiently clear.
The assessment criteria reflected in the SREP
Guidelines are built on the concept of the risk of
excessive leverage a s defined in Article 4(1)(94) of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. This definition cannot
be altered by the SREP Guidelines. It should also be
read in conjunction with recitals 1 and 90 of that
Regulation.
No changes made.
Aspect for the assessment of
risk of excessive leverage
Respondents raised concerns with the majority of
aspects listed in paragraph 393 of the consultation
paper to be considered while performing the
assessment of the risk of excessive leverage,
suggesting a lack of consistency with definiti on of
the risk of excessive leverage as stated in the
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and a low probability
for those aspects to lead to the imposition of P2R -
LR. Respondents agreed with paragraph 393(c),
confirming that volatility in the leverage ratio could
be a reason to consider P2R-LR.
Respondents suggested to reword paragraphs
393(a)(i) and 393(a)(ii) in order to clarify that the
nature and structure of institutions’ transactions
The aspects for the assessment of the risk of excessive
leverage follow the structure of Article 104a(2) of
Directive (EU) 2013/36/EU, requiring competent
authorities to assess (i) risks that are not covered or
not sufficiently covered by P illar 1 requirements ; (ii)
risks that are explicitly excluded or not explicitly
addressed by Pillar 1 requirements; and (iii) risks that
are likely to be underestimated by Pillar 1
requirements. Nevertheless, to further consider
institutions’ specific circ umstances, the intensity of
the assessment of the risk of excessive leverage
should be graduated. While the relevance of each of
the aspects should be considered, an in -depth
assessment should be conducted only for those
institutions where any specific asp ect is deemed
Paragraphs 393 and
394 amended
graduating the
intensity of the
assessment of
aspects of the risk of
excessive leverage.
Paragraph 394(a)(i)
amended.
Paragraph 394(b)
amended to
graduate the
assessment of risks

[Page 276]
276
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
are not driven by the objective to take advantage of
regulatory loopholes. M oreover, respondents
stated that window -dressing activities should
already be covered by the newly introduced
regulatory reporting on SFTs.
Respondents suggested to reword paragraph
393(a)(iii) on the basis that concentrations in
written options on equity and short positions via
credit derivatives would already be adequately
covered by the standard SA -CCR treatment under
Pillar 1 calculations.
Some respondents suggested to reconsider the
wording of paragraph 393(b), focusing only on the
risk of compliance, as considering excluded items
from the leverage ratio, in line with Article 429a of
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013, in the determination
of P2R -LR would override these provisions. Other
respondents presented an opposite view that
compliance risk should be addressed by supervisory
measures other than P2R-LR.
Respondents suggested to amend paragraph 393(d)
as P2R-LR should be determined based on the level
of exposures and Tier 1 capital at the date of
assessment, therefore excluding any foreseeable
growth of such exposures.
material. This has been further clarified in the
Guidelines.
While it was not intended to imply that any use of
certain instruments is likely to be related to
regulatory arbitrage of optimisation, there are certain
indicators for increased li kelihood of such practices,
which should be analysed by competent authorities in
the context of the specific business model of the
institution. The introduction of regulatory reporting
on SFTs provides an overview of intra -quartile
variability in exposures and is therefore a key source
of information for competent authorities to identify
possible window dressing/optimisation. While it may
not always be related to window -dressing, also
customer demand driven intra -quartile patterns in
leverage ratio exposure could equally lead to
vulnerabilities to be addressed by P2R-LR.
On the example included in paragraph 393(a)(iii),
where institutions are highly exposed to written
options on equity, or to short positions via credit
derivatives, the risk of higher losses can occur. Such a
risk may not be sufficiently captured in the SA -CCR
methodology, therefore potentially underestimating
the leverage ratio exposure.
The assessment of risks explicitly excluded from Pillar
1 requirements is required by Article 104a(2) of t he
Directive (EU) 2013/36/EU to ensure appropriate
coverage of the risk of excessive leverage. In this
context, while identified cases of non -compliance
should be fixed without undue delay and may be
subject to other supervisory measures, any concerns
explicitly not
addressed by Pillar 1.
Paragraph 394(a)(iii)
amended including a
reference to off -
balance shee t
exposures.

[Page 277]
277
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
about the ability of the institution to ensure
continued compliance with the criteria for exclusions
specified in Article 429a of Regulation (EU) No
575/2013 may be the basis for P2R-LR.
The determination of P2R -LR should be made on
current and not projected e xposures. Therefore, the
concept of ‘foreseeable growth of exposures’ is
replaced by the narrower concept of risk of excessive
leverage originating from the off -balance sheet
exposures. As significant concentrations in potentially
volatile off-balance sheet items can imply contingent
leverage not sufficiently covered by Pillar 1
requirements, a reference to off -balance sheet
exposures has been introduced in paragraph
394(a)(iii).
Question 4: Do you think that the assessment of dimensions and indicators described in the concerned explanatory box would al so be relevant for the assessment
of the risk of excessive leverage? Are there any other elements or indicators that you are using in the assessment of this risk?
Additional dimensions and
indicators for the assessment
of the risk of excessive leverage
Respondents did not support the inclusion of
proposed additional dimensions and indicators for
the assessment of the ri sk of excessive leverage in
the Guidelines. Respondents raised concerns that
the dimensions and indicators go beyond the
provisions of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and that
their inclusion would lead to some automatism
imposing P2R-LR. Moreover, since such dimensions
and indicators were already considered by the EBA
while calibrating the leverage ratio requirements at
3%, respondents considered that their
The dimensions were developed on the basis of the
definition of the risk of excessive leverage, as defined
in Article 4(1)(94) Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. The
consideration of such dimensions could enrich the
assessment of the different aspects of the ris k of
excessive leverage, without any automatism for the
determination of P2R -LR. In this regard there should
be no significant issue with potential double counting.
In addition, it needs to be considered that the same
own funds can be used to meet the TREA-based ratio
and the leverage ratio.
Paragraph 394(c)
amended to consider
the business model
of the institution.

[Page 278]
278
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
consideration in the SREP assessment would lead to
a contradiction.
One respondent believes that using s uch
dimensions and indicators is questionable,
considering that the assessment of excessive
leverage should not pose the same risks as those
considered for other requirements, avoiding double
counting with RWA capital stack.
Some of those dimensions were used to calibrate a
minimum leverage ratio requirement for all
institutions, disregarding their size, complexity of
activities and risk profile. On that basis, considering
them in the asses sment of the risk of excessive
leverage of an individual institution could enrich the
analysis. However, considering the consultation
feedback these dimensions were not introduced
explicitly in the analysis of the risk of excessive
leverage. Nevertheless, to ensure that specific
circumstances are taken into account, at least the
business model of the institution should be
considered to identify potential high risks of excessive
leverage.
Question 5: Can you provide examples of situations which in your view might require CET1 instead of other capital instruments to cover potential losses in relation
to P2R and P2R-LR?
Quality of capital to cover P2R
and P2R-LR
Respondents suggested to limit the possibility for
asking for a high quality of capital to cover P2R and
P2R-LR only to well -founded individual cases, at
competent authorities’ discretion, in line with the
current version of the Guidelines. No specific
examples were provided.
As the aim of P2R and P2R-LR is to cover risks that are
not covered or not sufficiently covered by Pillar 1
requirements, institutions are expected to meet such
additional requirements with own funds satisfying at
least the same conditions as the ones used to meet
Pillar 1 requirements.
In accordance with Article 104a(4) of Directive
2013/36/EU, competent authorities may require
institutions to meet their additional own funds
requirements with capital of higher quality, where
necessary, and having regard to the specific
circumstances of the institutions.
No changes made.

[Page 279]
279
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Quality of capital to cover P2R-
LR
The majority of respondents encouraged the
coverage of P2R-LR using Tier 1 capital, while some
others asked for enlarging such coverage to Tier 2
capital.
As the aim of P2R -LR is to cover risks that are not
covered or not sufficiently covered by Pillar 1
requirements, institutions are expected to meet such
additional requirements with own funds satisfying at
least the same conditions as the one used to meet
Pillar 1 requirements, in line with Article 104a(4) of
the Directive 2013/36/EU.
No changes made.
Question 7: What are your views on the guidance for setting P2G and P2G -LR? Is it sufficiently clear?
Supervisory stress test
methodology
Some respondents asked for clarification on the
relevance of the EU supervisory stress test
methodology to set up P2G and P2G -LR, suggesting
that more prominence could be given to the
institution’s internal stress test scenarios and
outcomes.
One respondent emphasised the case of small and
non-complex institutions, asking for more
clarification on the application of the principle of
proportionality.
Institutions’ stress tests are considered alongside
supervisory stress tests, the latter being a regulatory
requirement in accordance with Articles 100 and
104b of Directive 2013/36/EU. While those are
complementary, for the purpose of the overall
consistency of the P2G and P2G -LR setting and the
level playing field between the institutions,
supervisory stress te sts should be used as a primary
source of information.
Article 100 of Directive 2013/36/EU requires
competent authorities to carry out as appropriate ,
but at least annually , supervisory stress tests on
institutions they supervise whose results should be
taken into account in the SREP. Paragraph 427 of the
Guidelines takes into account the principle of
proportionality providing some flexibility regarding
the conduct of such a stress test, allowing the
application of simplified forms of supervisory stress
tests for non-Category 1 institutions.
No changes made.

[Page 280]
280
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Distribution of losses across
the stress test horizon for P2G
purposes
Some respondents suggested a more holistic view
of how losses are distributed over the forward -
looking time horizon when it comes to the
determination of P2G and P2G-LR. The focus only on
the year where the maximum stress impact occurs
could, in some cases, distort the results. If this
emphasis remains, the distribution of losses should
be recogn ised through supervisory adjustm ents in
determining the size of P2G.
Article 104b of Directive 2013/36/EU requires
institutions to hold sufficient internal capital to be
able to absorb potential losses resulting from stress
circumstances. Setting P2G and P2G -LR on the basis
of the maximum impact of the stress aims at ensuring
this ability by institutions. The alternative proposed
by respondents to consider the average impact over
the stress horizon would not be sufficiently prudent,
especially under scenarios where maximum stress
impact occurs in the first year.
No changes made.
Bucketing approach for the
determination of P2G and P2G-
LR
A few respondents requested further clarifications
on the bucketing approach, including more
detailed, quantitative explanation on the numbers,
ranges, and adjustments of the buckets.
Additionally, with regard to the flexibility left to
competent authorities to determine P2G and P2G -
LR outside of the bucket range, one respondent
believes that such a possibility may impair
methodological harmonisation.
The bucketing approach is only optional for
competent authorities. Consequently, the numbers,
ranges, and adjustments within the buckets should
remain at competent authorities’ discretion.
No changes made.
Overlap between P2G and P2R
Some r espondents believe that the approach
according to which P2G can or should ‘cover certain
aspects of the same risks addressed by P2R ’ is
questionable, bearing in mind that, in line with
Article 104a of Directive 2013/36/EU, P2R must
cover all material risks run by the institution due to
its own activities and not covered by other
requirements of Directive 2013/36/EU and
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. These same risks
should not be reflected in other requirements or
The EBA agrees that there should be no overlap
between P2R and P2G applied in accordance with
those guidelines. This is clearly reflected in Section 7.2
specifying where P2R should be applied, whereas
Section 7.7 specifies the circumstances for applying
P2G.
Paragraph 435 highlights the fact that
macroeconomic downturn scenarios used for the
purpose of stress testing may not entirely capture
some risks and only provide examples of the risks that
No changes made.

[Page 281]
281
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
guidance. This would increase the non -
transparency of P2G and the regulatory capital
requirements.
may appear most frequently in practice and therefore
elaborate on how to address such risks under adverse
conditions.
P2G to cover climate risk
Respondents expressed concerns about the
inclusion of climate risk within P2G. They reminded
that in line with the EBA report on ESG risk
management and supervision (published in July
2021) climate risk should be incorporated
proportionately and progressively, and only
following further data and methodological
developments in the area of climate stress testing.
The EBA confirms earlier stance included in the
Report on ESG risk management and supervision that
the consideration of ESG risks under P2R and P2G
should be proportional and progressive, along with
the development of data and methodologies and of
supervisory practices. On that basis, broader
considerations on the inclusion of ESG risks within the
SREP will be part of the next review of these
guidelines. Therefore, at this stage, the reference to
climate risk in the context of P2G has not been
included.
The reference to
climate risk has not
been included in
paragraph 434.
Supervisory stress test
methodology for the
determination of P2G-LR
Respondents suggested to limit the imposition of
P2G-LR to exceptional and duly justified cases, as
the majority of institutions in the EU are not subject
to the risk of excessive leverage due to the nature
of their business and operating models.
Additionally, respondents stated that, in the
consideration of stress test results for setting P2G -
LR, particular attention should be paid to the stress
test methodology and assumptions, especially the
static balance sheet assumptions.
Competent authorities should use stress tests results
to inform the determination of P2G -LR, based on the
impact of the stress on the leverage ratio, and ensure
appropriate coverage, independently of the exposure
to the risk of excessive leverage under normal
conditions.
The EBA acknowledges the limitations for the
calibration of P2G -LR due to certain stress test s
assumptions. To address such limitations, the
adjustments listed i n paragraphs 432 and 434 of the
Guidelines should be considered by competent
authorities, including consideration of the impact of
the static balance sheet assumption.
No changes made.

[Page 282]
282
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Application date of P2G-LR
Respondents asked for clarification regardi ng the
first date of application of the determination of
P2G-LR. Some respondents advocated a later
implementation date in order to test the feasibility
and reliability of P2G-LR calibration methodology.
The obligation to consider P2G-LR is set out in Article
104b of Directive 2013/36/EU, which, subject to
national transposition, is applicable since December
2020. However, in the first year of application of this
requirement, competent authorities may adopt a
simplified, pragmatic approach for their assessm ent,
to the extent that this is considered sufficiently
reliable.
No changes made.
Determining and setting P2G
and P2G-LR
Respondents pointed out the absence of legal basis
in Article 104b of the Directive 2013/36/EU to
consider that the objective of P2G and P2G-LR is the
protection against a potential breach of TSCR and
TSLRR, respectively.
In accordance with Article 104b(3) of Directive
2013/36/EU, P2G shall be the own funds exceeding
Pillar 1, Pillar 2 and capital buffers requirements
which are needed t o reach the overall level of own
funds considered appropriate by competent
authorities to cover risks and absorb potential losses
resulting from stress scenarios. P2G and P2G -LR
should therefore protect institutions from breaching
TSCR and TSLRR at all tim es, including under adverse
conditions.
No changes made.
Potential double counting of
macroprudential risks
(P2G/P2G-LR and buffers)
Respondents argued that overlaps between P2G
and other applicable measures should be avoided.
On that basis, respondents considered that P2G and
P2G-LR should be fully offset against all combined
buffer requirements , respectively, and with the
leverage ratio buffer for GSIB, as such capital
requirements have the objective of covering stress
effects. This was further justified considering the
objective of P2G and P2G-LR of protecting against a
potential breach of TSCR and TSLRR , res pectively,
which do not include any buffer requirements.
The potential overlaps between the buffers and P2G
must be considered taking into account specific
purposes of given elements of the combined buffer
and the purpose of P2G. The offsetting against the
capital conservation buffer and under specific
circumstances against the countercyclical buffer is
allowed. Other buffers are not expected to overlap
with P2G due to their different specific purpose, and
hence off-setting would not be appropriate.
No changes made.

[Page 283]
283
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Question 8: What are your views on possible disclosures, which may be attached to P2G and/or ranges of buckets in case they a re identified?
Disclosure of P2G and P2G-LR
All respondents recommended not disclosing P2G
and P2G-LR to the market under any circumstances.
On the other hand, respondents highlighted that
they would appreciate more detailed feedback from
competent authorities on the methodologies used
for P2G and P2G-LR determination.
The consultation question was included to gather the
views on this topic, however, P2G and P2G -LR
disclosure to the market is not covered in the
guidelines.
To enhance transparency and supervisory dialogue,
competent authorities should appropriately justify to
the institutions the determination of their P2G and
P2G-LR, providing the main elements of the
methodology. This clarification was added to the
guidelines in the context of communication of P2G
and P2G-LR under Section 7.7.1.
Paragraph 437
added.
Question 9: What are your views on the capital instruments potentially used to cover losses in relation to P2G-LR? Please provide the rationale or specific examples
for your views.
Meeting P2G with CET1
Some respondents opposed the requirement for
P2G to be fully met with CET1 as too conservative
and suggested that the use of other capital
instruments should be allowed, mirroring the
quality of capital to cover P2R.
One respondent suggested to split the stress test
impact into firstly the effects stemming from
impairments that should be covered by CET1 capital
and secondly the effects stemming from changes in
risk-weighted assets that should mirror t he quality
of capital to cover P2R.
A few respondents also noted that the EBA does not
have a mandate to specify a tightening of the
P2G aims to act as a capital buffer in times of stress.
To ensure a proper and timely absorption of losses
under adverse conditions, such a buffer should be
covered with CET1 capital.
Decomposing the impact into impairment and RWA
components would create additional compl exity to
the framework and could negatively affect
transparency relating to the stress test exercise.
Moreover, both components can be translated into
CET1 impact to ensure timely absorption of losses
under stress.
In the absence of specific provisions rel ated to the
quality of capital to cover P2G in Directive
No changes made.

[Page 284]
284
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
expected Level 1 requirements, and that P2G is
conditional on the provisions of Directive
2013/36/EU.
2013/36/EU, the EBA SREP Guidelines further specify
these requirements to foster harmonisation in the
application of EU law and consistency of supervisory
practices across the EU.
Quality of capital to cover P2G-
LR
Respondents advocated the coverage of P2G -LR
using Tier 1 capital, consistently with Pillar 1
requirements and P2R-LR, to maintain coherence in
the computation of the various leverage
requirements.
To ensure consistency with and appropriate
monitoring of the leverage ratio -based capital
requirements, P2G -LR should be covered by Tier 1
capital.
Paragraph 439
amended specifying
capital quality for the
coverage of P2G-LR.
Title 8: Assessing risks to liquidity and funding
Liquidity and funding risk
One respondent showed support for the current
liquidity and funding risk assessment framework
included in the SREP Guidelines. It also requested
the EBA deep dive into the comparability and level
playing field between institutions.
The EBA carries out regular monitoring of
convergence of supervisory practices in line with its
mandate.
No changes made.
Analysis of concentration /
diversification of liquid assets
One respondent requested that the analysis of the
concentration/diversification of liquid assets should
be done in accordance with the criteria laid out in
Article 8(1) of Commission Delegated Regulation
(EU) 2015/61.
Another respondent was requesting changes to
paragraphs 484(a) and 493(b) of the CP aimed at
clarifying th at the HQLA concentration analysis
should exclude sovereign public debt as setting a
limit for an institution’s holdings of sovereign debt
could have negative consequences that could
potentially lead institutions to the purchase of
Paragraph 484 of the CP (paragraph 487of the final
GL) is of a broader nature as it forms part of the
general framework expected for the identification
and measurement of the liquidity risk of the bank.
More specifically, it is envisaged t hat banks should
have an adequate set of indicators on the degree of
diversification of the liquid assets they hold. This is
broad information for banks and supervisors to better
understand the liquidity risk profile of the institution.
Paragraph 493(b) of the CP (paragraph 496(b) of the
final GL) was further improved by clarifying that the
limits set out in these provisions should be
Paragraph 495(b)
amended.

[Page 285]
285
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
other, less liquid and more risky assets, such as ABS,
MBS or CB from other financial institutions.
With reference to paragraph 493 of the CP another
respondent asked the EBA to reconsider the
wording of that paragraph to better reflect the
principle of proportionality.
understood in the context of Article 8(1) of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61.
However, no further changes to the text are deemed
appropriate given that the analysis envisaged in this
paragraph should be applicable to all the credit
institutions.
Analysis of consistency
between the currency
denomination of liquid assets
and net outflows as well as
between the currency
denomination of the available
stable funding and the required
stable funding
One respondent requested to further clarify in the
text of the GL (and specifically in paragraphs 484,
491, 572 and 575 of the CP) that consistenc y
between the currency denomination of the
available stable funding and the required stable
funding (as well as between liquid assets and net
outflows) should only be achieved for material
currencies (i.e. those in which the position is greater
than 5% of total liabilities without own resources).
Another respondent claimed that paragraph 491(b)
of the CP setting out the assessment of
conservatism of the limits the institution has in
place to ensure consistency between the currency
denomination of their li quid assets and the
distribution by currency of their net liquidity
outflows, goes beyond the level 1 regulation. It
therefore requested the deletion of that paragraph
or the specification that such an analysis should be
performed only ‘where appropriate’.
For paragraph 484 of the CP (paragraph 487 of the
final GL) see the answer above.
Paragraph 491 of the CP (paragraph 494 of the final
GL) refers to the internal control framework put in
place to ensure currency consistency between liquid
assets and net l iquidity outflows. It was clarified that
a particular analysis of currency mismatch limits in
place for the purposes of Article 8(6) of Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61 should be
envisaged.
Paragraph 572 of the CP (paragraph 575 of the final
GL) frames potential supervisory measures with
regard to the diversification of the liquidity buffer and
currency consistency between liquid assets and net
outflows in the context of the LCR with specific
reference to the relevant regulatory provisions of
Commission Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61.
Therefore, no further adjustments are needed.
Paragraph 575 of the CP (paragraph 578 of the final
GL) frames potential supervisory measures with
regard to the currency consistency between available
and required stable funding in the NSFR with specific
reference to the relevant regulatory provisions of
Paragraph 493(b)
amended.

[Page 286]
286
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
Regulation (EU) No 575/2013. Therefore, no further
adjustments are needed.
Assessment of robustness of
the liquidity contingency plan
One respondent suggested deleting paragraph
494(d) of the CP, which requires competent
authorities to ascertain that ‘the LCP describes
clearly that the LCR liquidity buffer is designed to be
used in case of stress ’. The respondent argued that
the proposed provisions contradict the current
design of the LCR.
The provisions included in the SREP GL are consistent
with Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 and Commission
Delegated Regulation (EU) 2015/61, where the usage
of the liquidity buffer is envisaged unde r stress even
if it leads to a n LCR level of below 100%. In this
respect it is important to note the following
requirements applicable to credit institutions:
Article 412(1) of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
requires that: ‘Institutions shall hold liquid assets, the
sum of the values of which covers the liquidity
outflows less the liquidity inflows under stressed
conditions so as to ensure that institutions maintain
levels of liquidity buffers which are adequate to face
any possible imbalance between liquidity inflows and
outflows under gravely stressed conditions over a
period of 30 days. During times of stress, institutions
may use their liquid assets to cover their net liquidity
outflows’.
Recital 3 of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)
2015/61 further cla rifies that: ‘Consistent with BCBS
liquidity standards, rules should be adopted to define
the liquidity coverage requirement as a ratio of a
credit institution’s buffer of “liquid assets” to its “net
liquidity outflows ” over a 30 -calendar-day stress
period. “Net liquidity outflows ” should be calculated
by deducting the credit institution ’s liquidity inflows
from its liquidity outflows. The liquidity coverage
ratio should be expressed as a percentage and set at
No changes made.

[Page 287]
287
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
a minimum level of 100%, when fully implemented,
which indicates that a credit institution holds
sufficient liquid assets to meet its net liquidity
outflows during a 30-day stress period. During such a
period, a credit institution should be able to quickly
convert its liquid assets into cash without recourse to
central bank liquidity or public funds, which may
result in its liquidity coverage ratio falling temporarily
below the 100% level. Should that occur or be
expected to occur at any time, credit instit utions
should comply with the specific requirements laid
down in Article 414 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013
for a timely restoration of their liquidity coverage
ratio to the minimum level’.
Article 4(3) of Commission Delegated Regulation (EU)
2015/61 allows that: ‘By derogation from paragraph
2, credit institutions may monetise their liquid assets
to cover their net liquidity outflows during stress
periods, even if such a use of liquid assets may result
in their liquidity coverage ratio falling below 100 %
during such periods ’. As highlighted in the
abovementioned articles the level 1 regulation
assumes the use of the liquidity buffers under
stressed conditions , thus the provisions included
under paragraph 494(d) (paragraph 497(d) of the final
guidelines) do not contradict it.
Title 10: the overall SREP assessment and application of supervisory measures
Macroprudential measures One respondent requested the EBA to further
clarify the text of the GL to avoid potential double
Section 10.9 of the SREP GL on the interaction
between supervisory and macroprudential measures
has already been significa ntly simplified with a view
No changes made.

[Page 288]
288
Comments Summary of responses received EBA analysis Amendments to
the proposals
counting of risks by the microprudential supervisors
and the macroprudential authorities given that the
reference to the macroprudential measures has
been remo ved from the GL as the recent
amendments to Directive 2013/36/EU clarified that
Pillar 2 requirements should be institution specific.
to ensuring institution-specific character of the SREP.
The risks taken into account by microprudential
supervisors are institution specific whereas those
considered by the macroprudential supervisors are
related to economy -wide indicators. No further
changes are considered necessary.
Supervisory measures
Another respondent requested the inclusion of a
statement in the text of the GL to demand
competent authorities to thoroughly assess the
need to undertake any supervisory measures
before they are applied. Whenever a supervisory
measure is applied, the inst itution should be
notified about the reasons underpinning the
decision.
Any measures result from specific findings that are
communicated to institutions. Furthermore,
requirements to justify the outcomes of the SREP are
already included in Title 7 of the SREP Guidelines.
No changes made.
One respondent suggested deleting the text of
paragraph 566(a) as it overlaps with the provisions
set out in paragraph 566(f). The paragraph is
concerned with the supervisory measures
addressing operational risk deficiencies.
As the provisions set out in paragraph 566(a)
(paragraph 569(a) in the final version of the GL) are
also included under the same paragraph in point (f),
the EBA deleted point (a).
Paragraph 568(a)
deleted.